The   Records 

of 

The  Trades   House   of  Glasgow 

1605-1678 


500    Copies  printed, 

is    No..^.D..<^.. 


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Archive 

in  2011  with  funding  from 

University  of  Toronto 


http://www.archive.org/details/recordsoftradeshOOglas 


) 


■^ —  -^ 


'"•''0.*^  ^''*'' 


i. 


The   Records 


of 


The  Trades  House  of  Glasgow 


A.D.    1605-1678 


Glasgow 

Printed   for  The  Trades   House  of  Glasgow 

MDCCCCX 


HD 


GLASGOW 
PRINTED   BY   AIRD   AND   COGHILL,   LIMITED 


S2535? 


Prospectus.] 


VOR  some  years  the  Clerk  to  the  House  has  been  collecting  and  arranging 
all  available  information  which  throws  light  on  the  history  of  the 
House  since  its  institution  in  1605  to  the  present  time. 

In  the  course  of  his  investigations  amongst  the  older  documents,  he  has 
had  to  refer  so  constantly  to  the  First  Mmute  Book  of  the  House  that  he 
has  made  a  complete  transcription  of  it. 

This  Minute  Book  covers  the  period  from  1605,  when  the  House  was 
instituted  by  the  Letter  of  Guildry,  to  1678 — six  years  after  its  constitution 
had  been  ratified  by  the  Scots  Parliament. 

The  book  is  in  fair  preservation,  and  the  handwriting  is,  on  the  whole, 
wonderfully  clear,  but  as  the  writing  is  in  the  style  of  the  period,  the  book 
is  quite  unintelligible  to  the  ordinary  reader.  The  Records  it  contains  are 
of  great  value  in  relation  not  only  to  the  history  of  the  Trades  and  the 
Convenery  of  Glasgow,  but  also  to  the  general  history  of  the  city  at  a  most 
interesting  period  of  its  progress.  We  think  it  right,  therefore,  that  the 
Minute  Book  should  now  be  pubHshed,  so  that  these  early  Records  of  the 
business  and  procedure  of  the  Trades  and  the  House  might  be  preserved  in 
permanent  form,  and  might  also  be  available  for  popular  use. 

Under  the  auspices  of  the  House,  this  would  require  to  be  done  by 
private  subscription,  and  we  hope  that  a  ready  response  will  be  given  by 
all  interested  in  the  history  of  the  House  and  of  the  city. 

We  propose  that  the  Records  should  be  printed  in  one  quarto  volume, 
and  that  the  subscription  should  be  £1  is. — the  edition  to  be  limited  to 
500  copies,  each  copy  to  be  numbered  and  a  register  kept  of  its  issue,  and 
the  names  of  subscribers  to  be  printed  in  and  form  part  of  the  volume. 

ANDREW  MACDONALD,  Deacon  Convener. 
A.   GRAHAM   SERVICE,  Collector. 
JAMES   KIRKWOOD,  Lale  Convener. 
ANDREW  M'LENNAN,  Late  Collector. 


Trades  House,  Glasgow. 
February,   1909. 


List    of   Subscribers. 


Corporations. 

The  Corporation  of  Glasgow,  per  the  Town  Clerk. 

The  Incorporation  of  Hammermen  of  Glasgow. 

The  Incorporation  of  Tailors  of  Glasgow. 

The  Incorporation  of  Cordiners  of  Glasgow. 

The  Incorporation  of  Maltmen  of  Glasgow. 

The  Incorporation  of  Weavers  of  Glasgow. 

The  Incorporation  of  Bakers  of  Glasgow. 

The  Incorporation  of  Skinners  of  Glasgow. 

The  Incorporation  of  Wrights  of  Glasgow. 

The  Incorporation  of  Coopers  of  Glasgow. 

The  Incorporation  of  Fleshcrs  of  Glasgow. 

The  Incorporation  of  Masons  of  Glasgow. 

The  Incorporation  of  Gardeners  of  Glasgow. 

The  Incorporation  of  Bonnetmakers  and  Dyers  of  Glasgow. 

The   Royal  Philosophical  Society  of  Glasgow. 

The  Royal  Bank  of  Scotland,  Exchange  Square,  Glasgow. 

Libraries. 

The  University  of  Glasgow  Library. 

The  University  of  Aberdeen  Librarj'. 

The  University  of  St.  Andrews  Library. 

The  Mitchell  Library,  Glasgow.      (Two  copies.) 

Baillie's  Institution  Library,  Glasgow. 

Stirling's  and  Glasgow  Public  Library,  Glasgow. 


The  Right  Hon.  The  Earl  of  Rosebery,  P.C,  K.G.,  K.T. 
The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Newlands,  LL.D.     (Five  copies.) 
The  Right  Hon.  Charles  Scott  Dickson,  P.C,  K.C.,  M.P. 
The  Hon.  A.  M  Innes  Shaw,  Lord  Provost  of  Glasgow. 


Adam,  John,  Larchgrove,  Shettleston.     (Two  copies.) 

Alexander,  D.  M..  97  West  Regent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Alexander,  Hugh,  Eastfield,  Rutherglen. 

Alexander,  R.  F.,  105  Clyde  Street,  Anderston. 

Allan,  E.  J.  Mozart,  60  South  Portland  Street,  Glasgow. 

Allan.  John,  79  Sword  Street,  Glasgow. 

Allan,  Robert  G.,  Anchorage,  Bearsden. 

Anderson,  James,  Jun.,   i3  Midlothian  Drive,  Shawlands. 

Anderson,  John,  142  West  Nile  Street,  Glasgow. 

Anderson,  John,  Jun.,   iS  Park  Circus,  Glasgow. 


viii  LIST  OF  SUBSCRIBERS 

Anderson,  Wm.,  133  Wellington  Street,  Glasgow. 

Anderson,  William,  Jun.,  i  Moss  Street,  Dennistoun. 

Anderson,  William  Geddes,  Belfast  News  Letter,  Donegall  Street,  Belfast. 

Andrew,  James,  15  Crossloan  Road,  Kelvinside. 

Austruther-Gray,  Major  W.,  of  Camtyne  and  Kilmany,  Fifeshire. 

Archbishop  of  Glasgow  {The  Most  Rev.  John  A.  Maguire,  D.D.),  Crossbill  House,  Queen's 

Drive,  Glasgow. 
Arthur,  Sir  Matthew,  Bart.,  Fullarton,  Troon. 
Auchinvole,  John,  2  Lilybank  Terrace,  Glasgow. 

Baillie,  James,  12  Wilson  Street,  Hillhead. 

Baird,  Andrew,  93  Hutcheson  Street,  Glasgow. 

Baird,  J.  G.  A.,  Colstoun,  Haddington. 

Baird,  Matthew  B.,  West  House,  Bothwell. 

Baird,  Montagu  M.  W.,  29  St.  Vincent  Place,  Glasgow. 

Bannerman,  Walter,  PoUokwood  House,  Kennishead. 

Bannerman,  William,  79  Virginia  Street,  Glasgow. 

Barbour,  Hugh,  132  Trongate,  Glasgow.     (Two  copies.) 

Barclay,  David,  245  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Barras,  W.  G.,  M.D.,  Westboume,  Govan. 

Bayne,  A.  Malloch,  304  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Beardmore,  William,  Parkhead  Forge  Rolling  Mills,  Glasgow. 

Beattie,  William,  Dineiddwg,  Strathblane.     (Two  copies.) 

Beatson,  Sir  George  T.,  M.D.,  7  Woodside  Crescent,  Glasgow. 

Bell,  David,  19  Eton  Place,  Hillhead. 

Bell,  George,  212  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Bell,  Sir  James,  Bart.,  135  Buchanan  Street,  Glasgow. 

Bennett,  Robert  J.,  Savoy  Park,  Ayr.     (Two  copies.) 

Benzie,  R.  Marr,  Jun.,  121  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Biggart,  Thomas,  105  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Bilsland,  Alexander,  16  Woodside  Terrace,  Glasgow. 

Bilsland,  Sir  William,  Bart.,  28  Park  Circus,  Glasgow. 

Bilsland,  Wm.  Blair,  28  Park  Circus,  Glasgow. 

Birrell,  Alexander,  114  John  Street,  Glasgow. 

Bishop   of   Glasgow   and   Galloway    (The   Right  Rev.  Arch.   Ean  Campbell,  D.D,),  The 

Bishop's  House,  Woodside  Terrace,  Glasgow. 
Black,  William  George,  Ramoyle,  Dowanhill  Gardens,  Glasgow. 
Blackie,  Walter  W.,  The  Hill  House,  Helensburgh. 
Blackwood,  Robert  Angus,  4  Royal  Terrace,  Queen's  Park,  Glasgow. 
Blair,  Hugh,  11  Spoutmouth,  Glasgow. 

Blair,  Thomas,  Lovat,  Second  Avenue,  King's  Park,  Mount  Florida. 
Broadfoot,  James,  Lymehurst,  Jordanhill. 
Brock,  Henry,  Darleith,  Cardross. 

Brodie,  William,  23  Belhaven  Terrace,  Kelvinside,  Glasgow. 
Brown,  Alexander  T.,   18  Glencaim  Drive,  PoUokshields. 
Brown,  -\.  R.,  Sheriff's  Chambers,  Glasgow. 
Brown,  H.  Taylor,  iii  French  Street,  Bridgeton. 
Brown,  J.  T.  T.,  97  West  Regent  Street,  Glasgow. 
Brown,  Nicol  Paton,  in  French  Street,  Bridgeton. 
Brownlie,  Thomas  G.,  Craigerne,  Hamilton  Drive,  PoUokshields. 
Bruce,  Alex.,  Clyne  House,  PoUokshields. 
Buchanan,  Andrew,  DunliUan,  Helensburgh. 


LIST  OF  SUBSCRIBERS.  ix 


Buchanan,  Duncan,  399  London  Road,  Glasgow. 

Buchanan,  Joshua,  63  West  Cumberland  Street,  Glasgow. 

Buchanan,  \Vm.,  12  Henderson  Street,  Glasgow. 

Burnet,  John  Jas.,  A.R.S..\.,  239  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Burnett,  Robert,  336  Pollokshaws  Road,  Glasgow. 

Bums,  John,  Jun.,  82  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Calder,  Robert,  104  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Campbell,  John  R.,  31   St.  Vincent  Place,  Glasgow. 

Campbell,  M.  Pearce,  Dean  o£  Guild,   137  Ingram  Street,  Glasgow. 

Campbell,  Malcolm,   18  Gordon  Street,  Glasgow. 

Campbell,  Wm.,  32  Monteith  Row,  Glasgow. 

Cameron,  Duncan,  140  Govan  Street,  Glasgow,  S.S. 

Cameron,  W.  K.,  140  Govan  Street,  Glasgow,  S.S. 

Cant,  James,  52  St.  Enoch  Square,  Glasgow. 

Cassels,  William,  57  Fotheringay  Road,  PoUokshields. 

Chalmers,  David,  34  West  Bothwell  Street,  Glasgow. 

Chisholm.  Sir  Samuel,  Bart.,  20  Belhaven  Terrace,  Glasgow. 

Christie,  John  Alexander,  Keswick,  Woodburn  Road,  Newlands. 

Chrystal,  James,  Plantation  Bakeries,  Glasgow. 

Church,  W.  R.  M.,  104  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Clark,  John,  Foxley  Farm,  Tollcross.     (Two  copies  ) 

Clark,  W.,  23  Royal  Exchange  Square,  Glasgow. 

Clarke,  William,  81  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Cleghom,  Thos.  B.,  42  Clifford  Street,  Paisley  Road,  W.,  Glasgow. 

Cochran,  Ludovic  G.,  Braeside,  Port-Glasgow. 

Cochran,  Wm.,  190  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Coghill.  Wm.  C,  24  Douglas  Street,  Glasgow. 

Colburn,  Alexr.,  15  E.xchange  Square,  Glasgow. 

Copland,  John  P..  146  West  Regent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Corporation  of  Glasgow,  Tramways  Department. 

Costigane,  William,  Clifton  Hall,  PoUokshields. 

Couper,  John  G.,  21  Glassford  Street,  Glasgow.     (Five  copies.) 

Cowan,  Wm.  Burns,  44  Queen  Square,  Glasgow. 

Cowan,  Wm.  F.,  207  Hope  Street,  Glasgow. 

Cowie,  Archibald,  20  Blythswood  Square,  Glasgow. 

Craig,  John,  94  Paterson  Street,  Glasgow. 

Craig,  William,  36  Pollok  Street,  Glasgow. 

Crawford,  James  S.,  41  Robertson  Street,  Glasgow. 

Crawford,  Robert,  36  Hamilton  Drive,  Maxwell  Park,  Glasgow. 

Cunningham,  James,  20  Clarendon  Place,  Mount  Preston,  Leeds. 

Cunningham,  James  R..  Stanwix,  Newlands. 

Cunningham,  Robert,  559  Gallowgate,  Glasgow. 

Cunningham,  Thomas,  559  Gallowgate,  Glasgow. 

Currie,  John,  7  Kclvinside  Terrace,  N.,  Glasgow. 

Currie,  Robert  W.,  28  Westminster  Terrace,  Glasgow. 

Davis,  Samuel,  11  M'Kinlay  Street,  S.S.,  Glasgow. 
Davidson,  Robert,  9  Virginia  Street,  Glasgow. 
Dewar,  Donald,  44  Annette  Street,  Glasgow. 
Dick,  David,  91  Forth  Street,  PoUokshields. 
Dinsmore,  W.  H.,  140  Bath  Street,  Glasgow. 


X  LIST  OF  SUBSCRIBERS. 

Donald,  Alex.,  183  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Donaldson,  Peter,  5  Princes  Terrace,  Glasgow. 

Douglas,  John  P.,  Langavat,  Kilmacolm. 

Douglas,  Wm.,  Ashlea,  Bellahouston,  Glasgow. 

Dreghom,  David,  Greenwood,  Pollokshields. 

Drynan.  James,  35  Athole  Gardens,  Kelvinside. 

Duncan,  Alexander,  LL.D.,  242  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Duncan,  A.  R.,  Kier  Cottage,  Irvine. 

Duncan,  J.  A.,  F.R.G.S.,  13S  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Duncan,  Robert,  Whitefield  Works,  Govan. 

Duncan,  Thos.,  468  Great  Western  Road,  Glasgow. 

Dunlop,  Robert  J.,  70  Wellington  Street,  Glasgow. 

Dunlop,  Thomas,  70  Wellington  Street,  Glasgow. 

Dunn,  James,  City  Chambers,  Glasgow. 

Dunn,  John,  276  Abercromby  Street,  Glasgow. 

Dunn,  R.  Hunter.  4  Crown  Terrace,  Glasgow,  W. 

Dyer,  Henry,  D.Sc,  8  Highburgh  Terrace,  DowanhiU. 

Eadie,  Alexr.,  Inglefield,  Pollokshields. 

Eadie,  John,  12  Bridge  Street,  Glasgow. 

Easton,  J.  M..  Tordarroch,  Helensburgh.     (Two  copies.) 

Edmiston.  Alexr.,  Whitefield,  Rutherglen. 

Fergus,  James,  58  York  Street,  Glasgow. 
Ferguson,  Alexr.,  116  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 
Ferguson.  J.  Marshall,  33  St.  George's  Road.  Glasgow. 
Findlay,  Joseph,  11  Winton  Drive,  Kelvinside. 
Fleming,  Andrew  L.,  Dunsyre,  Merrylee  Road,  Newlands. 
Forsyth,  Alexr.,  29  Melville  Street,  Glasgow. 
Forsyth,  Moses,  43  Bishop  Street,  Anderston. 
Fortune,  David,  19  Rowallan  Gardens,  Partick. 

Galbraith,  John  S.,  30  Renfield  Street,  Glasgow. 

Galloway,  Thomas,  Balgray,  Kelvinside. 

Gardner,  James,  584  Dobbie's  Loan.  Glasgow. 

Gardner,  John,  39-45  Brunswick  Street,  Glasgow. 

Gemmell,  Wm.,  M.B.,  CM.,  Avoca,  Victoria  Drive,  Scotstounhill. 

Gibb,  Robert,  28  St.  Vincent  Crescent,  Glasgow. 

Gilchrist,  James,  3   Kingsborough  Gardens,  Kelvinside.     (Three  copies  ; 

Gilchrist,  James,  17  Dargarvel  Avenue,  Dumbreck. 

GilfiUan,  Wm.,  185  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

GiUies,  William,  204  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Glaister,  John,  M.D.,  3  Newton  Place,  W.,  Glasgow. 

Glen,  John,  Glengowan,  Pollokshields. 

Goldie,  Ex-Deacon  Convener  James,  52  St.  Enoch  Square,  Glasgow. 

Gourlay.  Robert,  LL.D.,  5  Marlborough  Terrace,  Glasgow. 

Cow,  Leonard,  LL.D.,  Hayston,  Kelvinside. 

Gracie,  .\lex.,  M.V.O.,  Fairfield  Works,  Govan. 

Graham,  Arthur  Herbert,  90  Mitchell  Street,  Glasgow. 

Graham.  David,  30  London  Street,  Glasgow.     (Two  copies.) 

Graham,  Duncan,  89  Renfield  Street,  Glasgow. 

Graham,  James,  Gowanlea,  Bearsden. 

Graham,  Matthew,  24  St.  Enoch  Square,  Glasgow. 


LIST  OF   SUBSCRIBERS.  xi 

Graham.  Mungo  M..  21  Bath  Street,  Glasgow.     (Two  copies.) 

Graham.  Robert,  165  Nithsdalc  Road.  PoUokshields. 

Gray,  George,  Town  Clerk,  Rutherglcn. 

Gray,  James,  43  Argyle  Street,  Glasgow. 

Gray,  Robert  D.,  393  Alexandra  Parade,  Glasgow. 

Green,  John  James,  58  Leslie  Street,  PoUokshields. 

Greenlees,  Thos.,  32  Queen  Street,  Glasgow. 

Grcig,  George,  Cotswold,  Prenton,  Birkenhead. 

Greig,  George,  Jun..  Cotswold.  Prenton.  Birkenhead. 

Greig,  James,  Ingleside,  Litherland  Park,  Liverpool. 

Greig,  William,  59  Glassford  Street,  Glasgow. 

Grimmond,  John,  St.  Helena,  Brooralea  Drive.  Giffnock. 

Guthrie,  John,  i  Clayton  Terrace,  Glasgow.     (Two  copies.) 

Hamilton,  Geo.  L.,  St.  Kilda,  Cathkin  Road,  Langside. 

Harper.  J.  Rankin,  191  Hyndland  Road,  Glasgow. 

Harvey.  -Albert,  2  Park  Terrace,  East,  Glasgow. 

Hay,  Adam  C,  Helenslea,  Moss  Street,  Dennistoun. 

Hay,  Dugald  Craig,  Newton  Mearns. 

Hay,  John,  130  Stanley  Street,  Glasgow. 

Hedderwick,  J.  D.,  2  Clairmont  Gardens,  Glasgow. 

Henderson,  Francis,  Anchor  Line  Buildings,  Glasgow. 

Henderson,  Frank  Y.,  67  West  Nile  Street,  Glasgow. 

Hendry,  James,  252  Main  Street,  Bridgeton. 

Herriot,  Geo.,  24  Moray  Place,  Strathbungo. 

Hewat,  Andrew,  g  Berkeley  Terrace,  Glasgow. 

Hill.  William  H.,  LL.D.,  Barlanark,  Shettleston. 

Hodge,  George,  135  Buchanan  Street,  Glasgow. 

Hopkins,  Hugh,  17  West  Regent  Street,  Glasgow.     (Two  copies.) 

Howatt,  William,  146  Buchanan  Street,  Glasgow. 

Howie,  John,  Drumbain,  Torrance. 

Howie,  Robert,  29  Argyle  Street,  Glasgow. 

Hughes,  George  J.,  166  Buchanan  Street,  Glasgow. 

Hume,  Alex.  W.,  14  Onslow  Drive,  Glasgow. 

Hunter,  ."Me.x.  N.,  89  Mitchell  Street,  Glasgow. 

Hunter,  Wm.  R..  116  Union  Street,  Glasgow. 

Hutton,  Alex.,  10  Rokeby  Terrace,  Hillhead,  Glasgow. 

Inglis,   John,  LL.D.,  4  Princes  Terrace,  Dowanhill. 
Innes,  Gilbert,  16  Kirklee  Road,  Glasgow. 

Jardine.  Wm.  M'Leod,  Union  Bank  of  Scotland,  Ltd.,  Trongate,  Glasgow. 
Johnston,  Andrew,  335  St.  Vincent  Street.  Glasgow. 
Johnston,  R.  N.,  5  Hanover  Street,  Glasgow. 

Kay,  Arthur,  F.S.A.,  Tregortha,  Winton  Drive,  Glasgow. 

Keith,  H.  S.,  Avonholm,  Hamilton. 

Keith,  Wm.,  Marischal,  Merrylce  Park,  Glasgow. 

Kent,  John,  Craigbank,  Parkhead,  Glasgow. 

Kennedy,  James.  Doonholm,  Ayr. 

Keppie,   John,  4  Blythswood  Square,  Glasgow. 

Kidston.  J.  B.,  50  West  Regent  Street,  Glasgow. 

King.  Chas.  M.,  Antermony  House,  Milton  of  Campsie. 

King,  John  C,  21  Newton  Place,  Glasgow. 


xii  LIST  OF  SUBSCRIBERS. 

King,  \Vm.  Noiris,  223  Parliamentary  Road,  Glasgow. 

Kinghom,  John  P.,  90  Mitchell  Street,  Glasgow. 

Kirkland,  Archibald,  Provost  of  Irvine. 

Kirkwood,  Ex-Deacon  Convener  James,  Carling  Lodge,  Ibroxholm,  Govan. 

Kirkwood,  John,  4  Boleyn  Road,  PoUokshields. 

Kirsop,  James  Nixon,  79  St.  George's  Place,  Glasgow. 

Kirsop,  Thomas,  106  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Knox,  John,   13  Montgomerie  Quadrant,  Glasgow.     {Two  copies.) 

Laing,  Robert,  10  Gordon  Street,  Glasgow. 

Laird,  John,  Royal  Exchange  Salerooms,  6  North  Court,  Glasgow. 

Laraberton,  Hugh,  Surbiton,  PoUokshields. 

Lamond,  Robert,  163  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Law,  Andrew,  81  Hope  Street,  Glasgow. 

Lawson,  William,  JLD.,  36  Glencaim  Drive,  PoUokshields. 

Legate,  James,  70  Great  George  Street,  Hillhead. 

Liddell,  Alex.  J.,  Marshallbank,  Gower  Drive,  PoUokshields. 

Liddell,  Alex.  W.,  27  Abbotsford  Place,  Glasgow. 

Lightbody,  Wm.,  Jun.,  42  Sydney  Street.  Glasgow. 

Lindsay,  Malcolm  W.,  2  West  Regent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Lithgow,  W.  H.,  137  Ingram  Street,  Glasgow. 

Logie,  Wm.  Jamieson,  Dungavil,  9  Moss  Street,  Dennistoun. 

Lorimer,  Wm.,  Kirklinton,  Langside.     (Two  copies.) 

Lumsden,  Harry,  105  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Macara,  James,  19  Waterloo  Street.  Glasgow.     (Two  copies.) 

Macarthur,  James  A.,  24  Queen  Street,  Glasgow. 

McArly,  Thomas,  Kilgraston,  Kelvinside. 

McCallum,  John  B..  289  North  Woodside  Road,  Glasgow. 

McCallum,  Wm.,  194  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

McCall,  Mitchell  R.,  21  Craigmillar  Road,  Langside. 

McCracken,  A.,  40  St.  Vincent  Place,  Glasgow. 

Macdonald,  Allan  D.,  Hazeldene,  MUngavie. 

Macdonald,  Late  Deacon  Convener  Andrew,  Sherbrooke,  PoUokshields. 

Macdonald,  W.  H.  S.,  37  Esplanade,  Greenock. 

McDonald,  A.  B.,  City  Chambers,  Glasgow. 

McDonald,  Wm.,  21  Hope  Street,  Glasgow. 

MacDougall,  Robt..  63  John  Street,  Glasgow. 

McEwan   Robt.  D.,  9  Eglinton  Drive,  Glasgow. 

Macfarlane,  George  M.,  510  Gallowgate,  Glasgow. 

Maclarlane,  Geo.  W.,  6  St.  John's  Road,  PoUokshields. 

Macfarlane,  J.  L.,  2  Lancaster  TeiTace,  Glasgow. 

Macfarlane,  Ex-Deacon  Convener  James,  Victoria  Biscuit  Works,  Glasgow.     (Two  copies.) 

Macfarlane,  John,  15:  North  Street,  Glasgow. 

McFarlane,  James,  22-24  Gallowgate  Street,  Glasgow. 

MacGarva,  Mrs.  Jean  Waterstone,  The  Cottage,  Ardwell,  Stranraer. 

MacGregor,  M.  C,  13  Broomhill  Terrace,  Partick. 

McGUvray,  R.  A.,  6  Newton  Terrace,  Glasgow. 

Mclntyre,  James,  43  Candleriggs,  Glasgow. 

Mclntyre,  T.  W.,  Sorn  Castle,  Ayrshire. 

Mackenzie.  James,  Dean  of  Faculty  of  Procurators,  150  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Mackenzie,  R.  K.,  66  Bath  Street,  Glasgow. 


LIST  OF  SUBSCRIBERS.  xiii 

McKechnie,  Dugald,  14  Candleriggs,  Glasgow.     (Two  copies.) 

Mackinlay,  Chas.  A.,  5  Belhavcn  Crescent,  Glasgow. 

McKinlay.  R.  J.,  West  View,  Millar  Street,  Wisliaw. 

Maclay,  William,  Thornwood  Hall,  Langside. 

Maclachlan.  Robert  Paton,  166  Buchanan  Street,  Glasgow. 

McLarty,  Edward,  309  Golfhill  Drive,  Dennistoun. 

Maclaren,  Robt.,  Eglinton  Foundry,  Glasgow. 

Maclaren,   R.  M.,  155  Hope  Street,  Glasgow. 

McLaren,  Alex.  B.,  Craig  Ard,  Giffnoclv. 

Maclellan,  Lewis,  67  Port  Dundas  Road,  Glasgow. 

McLennan,  Deacon  Convener  Andrew,  Newhall,  Glasgow. 

McLennan,  James  Bryce,  Ardoch,  Blanefield. 

MacLeod.  Pred.  L.,  142  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Macleod,  Rev.  William  H.,  Manse  of  Buchanan,  Drj'men. 

Maclean,  Magnus,  D.Sc,  Technical  College,  Glasgow. 

McLean,  Allan,  41  West  George  Street. 

MacLehose,  James,  &  Son,  61  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow.     (Four  copies.) 

MacLehose,  James,  61  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

McMeekin,  John,  Hamilton  Drive,  Hillhead. 

Macnair,  Thomas,  41  St.  Vincent  Place,  Glasgow. 

McNicol,  Donald.  2  Norval  Street,  Partick. 

Macouat,  R.  B.,  74  York  Street,  Glasgow. 

Macpherson,  Jas.  G.,  62  Queen  Street,  Glasgow. 

MacwhanncU,  Ninian,  58  West  Regent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Marks,  Samuel,  Burnbank  House,  Ardoch,  Cardross. 

Marks,  Samuel,  Jun.,  98  St.  .Andrew's  Drive,  Glasgow. 

Mason,  Ex-Deacon  Convener  Sir  Thomas,  Craigiehall,  Bellahouston. 

Mason.  Wm.  W.,  181  West  Regent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Mather,  John,  S2  Mitchell  Street,  Glasgow. 

Maxwell,  William,  6  Clifford  Road,  Stirling. 

Meikle,  John,  163  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Meikle,  William,  139  London  Street,  Glasgow. 

Metcalfe.  John  R.,  140  London  Street,  Glasgow. 

Millar,  Jackson,  Dcreel  House,  Ayr. 

Millar,  William,  1 1 1  Union  Street,  Glasgow. 

Miller,  Andrew,  283  Crow  Road,  Broomhill,  Partick. 

Miller,  George  J..  Greenoakhill,  Broomhouse. 

Miller,  J.  F.,  Greenoakhill,  Broomhouse. 

Miller,  James,  166  Buchanan  Street,  Glasgow. 

Miller,  R.  S.,  Greenoakhill,  Broomhouse. 

Miller,  Robt.,  58  Renficld  Street,  Glasgow. 

Miller,  William,  21  Princes  Square,  Strathbungo. 

Mitchell,  A.  M.,  8  Kew  Terrace,  Kelvinside. 

Mitchell,  Geo.  A.,  5  West  Regent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Mitchell,  Thomas,  Woodlands,  Bruce  Road,  Pollokshields. 

Mitchell,  Wra.  Jas.,  48  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Moncrieff,  Hugh,  45  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Moore,  Quintin,  Jun.,  loi  Armadale  Street,  Glasgow. 

Motherwell,  Robt.,  275  Golfhill  Drive,  Glasgow. 

Motion,   James  R.,   140  Hyndland  Road,  Glasgow. 

Morris,  T.  R.,  Lucknow,  Bishop's  Road,  Jordanhill. 

Morrison,  T.  W.,  29  Park  Circus,  Glasgow. 


xiv  LIST   OF   SUBSCRIBERS. 

Morton,  Jas.,  Dalquhurn,  Renton. 

Morton,  John.  lo  Broompark  Terrace,  Dennistoun. 

Muir,  Alexr..  134  Xithsdale  Drive,  Glasgow. 

Miiir,  Walter,  19  Soho  Street,  Glasgow. 

Muirhead.  John,  167  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Munro,  Alex.,  M.B.,  CM.,  12  Seton  Terrace,  Dennistoun. 

Munro,  George,  134  Howard  Street,  Glasgow. 

Murdoch,  Robert,  91  Maxwell  Road,  Glasgow. 

Murray,  David,  LL.D.,  169  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Murray.  John,  Ivy  Bank,  Dunblane. 

Myles,  A.  W.,  Town  Clerk  of  Glasgow. 

Neilson,  George,  LL.D.,  Stipendiary  Magistrate  of  Glasgow. 

Neilson,  Horatio,  118  Stevenson  Drive,  Shaw  lands. 

Nelson.  John  E.,  26  Queen  Street,  Glasgow. 

Nelson,  Walter.  135  Wellington  Street.  Glasgow. 

Nelson,  William,  180  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Ness.  James,  100  West  Regent  Street.  Glasgow. 

New  Club,  The,  144  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Nicol,  James,  City  Chamberlain,  34  Atholl  Gardens,  Glasgow. 

Norrie,  James  D.,  136  Wilton  Street,  Glasgow. 

Ogg,  Robert  Alexander.  192  Nithsdale  Road,  PoUokshields. 

Orr,  John  F.,  1S4  West  Regent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Osbourne,  John  P..  6  Garrioch  Drive,  JIaryhill. 

Osboume,  Thos.  Orr.  4  Polnoon  Place,  Clober  Road,  Milngavie. 

O'Mav,  Thos.,  14  Circus  Drive,  Dennistoun. 

Park,  Colonel  J.  Smith,  M.V.O.,  20  Park  Terrace,  Glasgow. 

Pate,  Robert.  142  West  Nile  Street,  Glasgow. 

Paterson,  Robt.  B.,  2  Windsor  Quadrant,  Glasgow. 

Paterson,  Robert,  105  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Paton,  Hugh,  West  Arthurlie,  Barrhead. 

Peacock,  R.  A.,  Dunard,  Maxwell  Park,  PoUokshields. 

Pentland,  R.  W.,  i  Wester  Coates  Road,  Edinburgh. 

Perritt,  Duncan,  13  Dalziel  Drive,  Glasgow. 

Pettigrew,  Andrew  H..  191  Sauchiehall  Street,  Glasgow.     (Two  copies.) 

Pettigrew,  Gavin,  2  Broomhill  Gardens,  Carmyle. 

Pettigrew,  Matthew,  Bank  of  Scotland,  Anniesland. 

Pollock,  John,  TuUiallan,  Bearsden. 

Porter,  John,  Rosebank,  Lennoxtown. 

Primrose,  Sir  John  Ure,  Bart.,  Redholme,  Dumbreck. 

Primrose,  William,  Centre  Street  Flour  Mills,  Glasgow. 

Provan,  Alexr..  6  Westercraigs,  Dennistoun. 

PuUar,  Peter  McDougall,  317  Onslow  Drive,  Glasgow. 

Ramsay,  A.  Maitland,  JLD..  15  Woodside  Place,  Glasgow. 

Ramsey,  Ex-Deacon  Convener  Robert,  14  Park  Terrace,  Glasgow.     (Five  copies.) 

Rankin,  Alexr.,  1S3  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Reid,  Andrew  T.,  10  Woodside  Terrace,  Glasgow. 

Reid,  Henry  A.,  121  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Reid,  Hugh,  Belmont,  Springbum,  Glasgow.     (Two  copies.) 

Reid,  Hugh,  209  Main  Street,  Shettleston. 

Reid,  J.  Miller,  no  Lancefield  Street,  Glasgow. 


LIST  OF  SUBSCRIBERS.  xy 

Reid,  James  A.,  LL.D.,  172  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Reid,  James,  Camlachie  Station,  East  Nelson  Street,  Glasgow. 

Reid,  James,  15  Montgomerie  Crescent,  Glasgow,  W. 

Reid,  William,  Hutton  Park,  Largs. 

Renfrew.  Robert  S..  136  North  Street,  Glasgow.     (Two  copies.) 

Renwick,  Robert,  Depute  Town  Clerk  o£  Glasgow. 

Richmond,  David  A.,  24  George  Square,  Glasgow. 

Richmond,  J.  R..  Westpark.  14  Hamilton  Drive,  PoUokshields. 

Ritchie,  William,  77  Queen  Street.  Glasgow. 

Ritchie,  Wm.,  137  Howard  Street,  Glasgow. 

Roberton.  Stephen,  105  John  Street,  Glasgow. 

Robertson,  John  M'Kellar,  7  Marlborough  Terrace,  Glasgow. 

Robertson.  Wm.,  7  Marlborough  Terrace,  Glasgow. 

Robin,  A.  G..  Castlehill.  Hamilton. 

Robin,  Matthew.  7  Melfort  .\venue.  Dumbreck. 

Roger,  Jas.  H.,  Rogano,  11  South  Exchange  Place,  Glasgow. 

Rogers,  H.  Redan.  Glencaim,  Baggallay  Street,  Hereford. 

Rome,  George.  13  Jane  Street.  BIythswood  Square.  Glasgow. 

Ross.  John  M..  Haggbows.  Sutherland  Avenue.  PoUokshields. 

Russell.  Wm.  F.,  48  West  Regent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Salton,  John.  73  Virginia  Street,  Glasgow. 

Sampson.  A.  W.,  Fairfield  Works,  Govan. 

Sandeman,  B.,  Fcrndean,  Lenzie. 

Sclanders.  David.  71  Virginia  Street.  Glasgow. 

Scott,  Robert,  8  Buchanan  Street,  Glasgow. 

Scott,  Roderick,  Broomhill  House.   5  Broompark  Circus,  Detmistoun. 

Scouller,  John,  The  Moss,  PoUokshields. 

Service,  Collector  Andrew  Graham.  48  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Service,  W.  S.,  204  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Sharp,  Alexander,  22  Craigpark,  Dennistoun. 

Sharp.  John  G..  172  Buchanan  Street.  Glasgow. 

Sharp,  Peter  M.,  22  Craigpark,  Dennistoun. 

Shaw,  William  Lambert.  Northbrook,  Gower  Drive,  PoUokshields. 

Shearer,  Wm.,  108  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Shields,  Daniel,  104  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Short.  Andrew.  4  Hillside  Villas,  Barry,  South  Wales. 

Smith.  Andrew.  Miltonlea,  Kilmacolm. 

Smith.  J.  Guthrie,  205  St.  Vincent  Street.  Glasgow. 

Smith.  J.  Murray,  Glasgow  News,  Hope  Street,  Glasgow. 

Smith,  James.  155  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Smith.  John,  Rosewood,  Albert  Road,  E..  Crosshill. 

Speirs,  A.  A.,  of  Elderslie.  Houston  House,  Renfrewshire.     (Two  copies.) 

Speirs,  Archd..  74  Canning  Street,  Glasgow. 

Speirs,  Wm.,  142  Queen  Street.  Glasgow. 

Spencer,  J.  J..  Edgehill.  Kelvinside. 

Steel,  John.  20  Albion  Crescent.  Dowanhill. 

Stewart,  Chas.  R.,  7  Windsor  Circus.  Kelvinside. 

Stewart,  J.  W.,  150  Hope  Street,  Glasgow. 

Stewart,  James,  42  Union  Street,  Glasgow. 

Stewart,  John,  Ardsheal,  Scotstounhill. 

Stewart,  John  G..  65  Great  Clyde  Street,  Glasgow. 

Stewart,  Malcolm,  121  Maxwell  Road,  Glasgow. 


xvi  LIST  OF  SUBSCRIBERS. 

Stevenson,  D.  M.,  12  Waterloo  Street,  Glasgow. 

Stevenson,  J.  V.,  Chief  Constable,  Central  Police  Chambers,  Glasgow. 

Stevenson,  John,  Plantation  Bakeries,  Glasgow.     (Two  copies.) 

Stevenson,  Robert,  So  Brown  Street,  Glasgow. 

Stiell,  John,  i  KinnouU  Place.  Dowanhill. 

Stirling-llaxwell,  Sir  John  SI.,  Bart.,  Pollok  House,  PoUokshaws. 

Stirrat,  James,  log  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Sutherland,  James  Renwick.  Kinrara,  Helensburgh. 

Symington,  James,  190  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Symington,  James  M.,  571  Cathcart  Road,  Glasgow. 

Talbot,  A.,  227  Paisley  Road,  Glasgow. 

Taylor,  Henry  H.,  21  Woodlands  Terrace,  Glasgow,  W. 

Taylor,  WUliam,  Florencemount,  Marj'hill  Park,  Glasgow.     (Two  copies.) 

Tennent,  James  B.,  5S  Pollok  Street,  Glasgow. 

Thomson,  James,  Mount  Royd,  Huddersfield. 

Thomson,  John,  3  Crown  Terrace,  Glasgow. 

Thomson,  William,  126  South  Portland  Street,  Glasgow. 

Tullis,  Ex-Deacon  Convener  James  T.,  Aytoun  House,  Dowanhill.     (Two  copies.) 

Tullis,  Robert,  24  Sandyford  Place,  Glasgow. 

Ure.  John  G.,  67  Hope  Street,  Glasgow. 
Urquhart,  John.  Rosyth,  Bearsden. 

Vallance,  John  H.,  31  East  Clyde  Street,  Glasgow. 

Walker,  George,  45  Renfield  Street,  Glasgow. 

Wallace,  John,  210  Ladbroke  Grove,  Notting  Hill,  London,  W. 

Watson,  Charles  P.,  33  Renfield  Street,  Glasgow. 

Watson.  Edward.   170  .\rgyle  Street,  Glasgow. 

Watson,  George,  170  Argyle  Street,  Glasgow. 

Watson,  John  M.,  Overton,  Cambuslang. 

Weir.  William,  302  Garscube  Road,  Glasgow. 

Whitson.  A..  104  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

White.  Ex-Dcacon  Convener  Matthew,  1 1  Princes  Terrace,  Glasgow. 

Whyte,  .-Mexander,  Pinelea,  Helensburgh. 

Wilson,  Allan  M.,  12  Waterloo  Street,  Glasgow. 

Wilson.  J.  A.,  M.D.,  Hardhill,  Central  Avenue,  Cambuslang. 

Wilson,  James,  no  West  Regent  Street.  Glasgow. 

Wilson,  James  G.,  Dalzell  Estate  Office,  Motherwell. 

Wilson,  James  Monte,  335  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

Wilson,  John,  28  Miller  Street,  Glasgow. 

Wilson,  Robert,  149  Howard  Street,  Glasgow. 

Wood.  Wm.  J.,  266  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

Woodbum,  William  de  B.,  197  Bath  Street,  Glasgow. 

VVylie,  James,  13  East  Clyde  Street,  Glasgow. 

Wylie,  Robert,  45  Buchanan  Street,  Glasgow. 

York,  James,  7  Park  Quadrant,  Glasgow. 
Young.  George,  97  Wellington  Street,  Glasgow. 
Young,  George  B.,  13  Kew  Terrace,  Kelvinside. 
Young,  James,  16  India  Street,  Glasgow. 
Young,  Thomas,  15  Whittingehame  Drive.  Glasgow. 
Yuile,  Thomas,  49  Cadogan  Street,  Glasgow. 


Preface. 


SOME  years  ago  I  was  desired  by  the  Deacon  Convener  and  the 
Representatives  of  the  Trades  House  to  re-wxite  the  History  of  the 
House.  Two  histories  had  ah-eady  been  published.  The  first,  by 
Mr.  Benjamin  Mathie,  writer  (Clerk  to  the  House,  1795-1831),  was  more  of  the 
nature  of  a  hand-book  or  guide.  It  was  written  and  pubhshed  in  1819,  and  a 
revised  edition  was  issued  in  1S27.  Much  of  it  became  obsolete  under  the 
effects  of  the  Burgh  Reform  Act  of  1833,*  and  of  the  Act  for  the 
aboUtion  of  exclusive  privileges  of  trading  in  1846. f  The  second,  by  Mr. 
George  Crawfurd,  writer  (Clerk  to  the  House,  1831-1875),  was  published  in 
1858.  Copies  of  this  book  are  still  plentiful.  It  is  most  interesting  to  general 
readers,  and  gives  a  reliable  epitome  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  House. 
Notwithstanding  the  limited  data  upon  which  Mr.  Crawfurd  had  to  work,  his 
"  Sketch  of  the  Trades  House,"  so  far  as  it  goes,  is  capable  of  little  improvement. 
It  is  open  to  amphfication  rather  than  to  correction. 

Since  1858,  however,  much  historical  material  has  been  published  which 
throws  hght  on  the  growth  of  the  craft  and  guild  systems  in  Glasgow,  notably 
the  Records  of  the  Convention  of  Royal  Burghs,  the  Glasgow  Burgh  Records 
and  Charters,  the  "  View  of  the  Merchants  House,"  and  histories  or  sketches 
relating  to  no  fewer  than  twelve  of  the  fourteen  incorporated  trades. 

To  draw  from  such  sources  a  series  of  notes  that  would  be  of  service  in 
compihng  a  more  complete  history  than  either  of  the  two  older  works,  was 
of  itself  a  considerable  task.  But  besides  this  there  were  some  hundreds  of 
old  documents  belonging  to  the  House  to  inventory  and  synopsise,  and  twenty 
large  volumes  of  manuscript  records  from  1605  to  the  present  day  to  peruse 
and  abstract  from.  Proper  and  accurate  use  of  the  first  Minute  Book  was 
found  impracticable  without  making  a  complete  transcription  of  its  contents. 
All  this  work  took  up  the  leisure  of  more  than  five  years. 

It  was  then  thought  that  apart  from  an  extended  History  of  the  House, 
which  would  obviously  involve  still  further  research,  a  beginning  might  be 
made  with  the  publication  of  the  first  volume  of  the  Records  in  a  form  similar 
to  that  of  many  Scottish  historical  collections.     This,  it  was  hoped,  would  be 

*  3  and  4  William  IV.,  c.  77.  1 9  and  10  Vict.  c.  17. 


xviii  PREFACE. 

of  service  to  others  than  those  interested  merely  in  Craft  and  Guild  affairs. 
Further,  the  publication  of  the  present  volume  might  have  the  result  of 
initiating  a  series  of  Craft  and  Guild  Records. 

The  reader  hardly  requires  to  be  reminded  that  the  Records  in  this  volume 
are  not  those  of  a  single  Craft  nor  of  the  Guildry  (which  in  Glasgow  was  com- 
posed of  two  ranks  of  Merchants  and  Craftsmen  Burgesses),  but  are  those  of 
the  Deacon  Convener's  Council.  This  Council  consisted  of  the  Deacons  of  all 
the  Crafts  (which  included  the  Surgeons,  now  disassociated,  and  the  Mariners, 
now  extinct),  with  a  certain  number  of  colleagues  supporting  each  Deacon. 
The  Council  owed  its  existence  in  Glasgow  to  the  Letter  of  Guildry  of  1605.* 

In  Ro3-al  Burghs,  the  Council  or  Court  of  Deacons,  often  called  the  Con- 
venery,  would  appear  to  ha\-e  been  representative  of  a  mere  voluntary  federation 
of  the  Crafts,  without  written  constitution  or  legal  sanction,  and  with  a  Deacon 
Convener,  who  was  the  creation  of  the  Deacons  alone. f  On  the  one  hand 
it  was  a  convenient  court  of  arbitration  for  settling  craft  disputes  ;  on  the  other 
it  was  a  foil  to  the  merchants,  who  were  usually  found  united  under  the  Dean 
of  Guild  in  one  compact  body  with  legal  status,  viz.,  the  Guild. 

Glasgow  was  not  a  Royal  Burgh,  but  a  Burgh  of  Barony  and  Regality. 
Prior  to  1605,  there  was  no  Guild  of  Merchants  and  no  Conv-enery  of  Trades. 
But  there  were  isolated  craft  associations,  most  of  them  legally  recognised  with 
Charters  and  Seals  of  Cause.  The  Letter  of  Guildry  constituted  a  guildry  for 
the  first  time  in  Glasgow,  but  not  simply  and  solely  a  Merchant  Guild.  The 
Glasgow  Guildry  was  to  consist  of  the  two  ranks  of  Merchants  and  Craftsmen 
Burgesses,  the  former  headed  by  a  Dean  of  Guild,  the  latter  by  a  Deacon 
Convener.  Both  ranks  were  brought  together  under  the  Presidency  of  the 
Dean  of  Guild  in  a  Dean  of  Guild  Court  of  eight  lyners,  four  from  each  rank. 

The  Crafts,  while  thus  consolidated,  continued  to  maintain  their  separate 
existence  and  to  manage  their  affairs  by  means  of  their  Deacons  and  Master 
Comis. 

The  Deacon  Convener's  Council  was  intended  to  form  a  representative 
chamber  of  the  leading  men  of  each  Craft.  Its  functions  were,  amongst  others, 
to  endeavour  to  settle  differences  between  the  Crafts  or  in  the  Crafts,  without 
recourse  to  law,  and  to  manage  a  joint  undertaking  for  behoof  of  poor  Craftsmen, 
viz.,  the  Crafts  Hospital.  These  were  its  private  functions.  Its  pubhc 
functions,  in  relation  to  the  Town  Council  and  the  community  generally, 
increased  as  the  years  went  on. 

•Appendix  I,  +  Sec  Bankton's  Institutes,  II..  p.  578,  par.  5. 


PREFACE.  xix 

The  Records,  now  published  for  the  hrst  time,  sliow  the  early  transactions 
of  the  Council,  which,  it  should  be  noted,  did  not  assume  the  name  of  the 
Crafts  House  or  Trades  House  until  it  had  been  in  operation  for  more  than 
50  j'ears.     It  was  never  officially  called  the  Convenery. 

The  Records  are  given  verbatim.  Nothing  has  been  omitted,  and  no 
liberties  have  been  taken  with  the  te.xt.  For  any  difficulty  which  the  reader 
may  e.\perience  with  seventeenth  century  spelling,  words,  and  phrases,  I, 
along  with  my  predecessors  of  the  time,  must  take  full  responsibility,  but  offer 
no  apology. 

It  is  but  right  to  say  that  about  one-sixth  of  the  book  in  the  form  of 
extracts  had  already  been  transcribed  by  Mr.  Robert  Renwick,  Depute  Town 
Clerk,  in  the  year  1889,  for  the  late  Mr.  Edmond  Baird  Paterson,  afterwards 
Collector  of  the  House.  These  extracts  \:ere  exceedingly  valuable  for  reference 
and  comparison,  but  no  further  use  has  been  made  of  them  in  connection  with 
the  present  publication. 

The  documents  in  the  Appendices  have  all  been  carefully  collated  with 
the  originals,  with  the  exception  of  the  letter  from  King  James  VT.,*  which 
could  not  be  obtained  for  reference. 

Thanks  are  due  to  Mr.  Robert  Renwick  for  help  afforded  in  many  ways ; 
also  to  Dr.  George  Neilson,  Stipendiary  Magistrate  ;  and  to  the  Incorporations 
of  Maltmen,  Weavers,  and  Bonnetmakers  and  Dyers,  for  permission  to  collate 
their  copies  of  the  Letter  of  Guildry  with  the  original  extract  from  the  Burgh 
Records  in  possession  of  the  House. 

I  must  also  record  my  sincere  thanks  to  Mr.  A.  R.  Duncan,  M.A.,  for  his 
able  assistance  and  co-operation  during  the  past  three  years. 

HARRY  LUMSDEN. 

Irvine,  March,  igio. 

Note. — The  second  volume  of  the  Records,  1678-1713,  has  been  amissing  since 
some  time  before  1831.  Any  information  which  may  lead  to  the  recovery 
of  this  volume  will  be  much  prized  by  the  House. 

*  Appendix  IV. 


Contents. 


DIRECTIONS   TO   READERS,  .  .  .  . 

RECORDS,  1605-1678, 

APPENDIX— 

Letter  of  Guildry,  -•-.-. 
Minute  of  Town  Council  anent  Wapinschaws, 
Deed  of  Foundation  of  Trades  Hospital, 
Letter  by  King   James  VI.,         -  .  .  . 

Ratification  of  the  Letter  of  Guildry,  - 

INDEX, 

LIST  OF  PLATES— 

Facsimile  of  Pages  328  and  329  of  Minute  Book, 
Facsimile  of  the  First  Page  of  the  Minute  Book, 
Facsimile  of  Page  22  of  the  Minute  Book, 
Facsimile  of  Back  of  Minute  Book,        .  .  . 

Facsimile  of  the  Last  Page  of  the  Minute  Book, 
Facsimile  of  the  Extract  of  the  Ratification  of  the 
Letter  of  Guildry,  -  -  .  -  . 


529 
553 
555 
559 
560 

56r 


Facing  Title  Page 

Facing  Page        i 

96 

360 

524 

560 


Directions   to    Readers. 


The  vvTitten  letters  throughout  the  book  represent  the  same  letters  as  The  Alphabet. 
are  in  use  now.     It  is  e.\tremely  doubtful  whether  the  two  additional  ancient 
characters  )>  and  5  were  ever  intended  to  be  written  by  the  different  scribes. 

The  former  letter  ]>  known  as  the  thorn,  and  representing  th,  may  have       If. 
been  in  the  mind  of  some  of  the  writers,  but  the  single  written  letter  found 
representing  th  is  most  undoubtedly  a  y  and  not  J>.      It  has  therefore  been 
printed  as  y,  e.g.,  ye=the,  yat  =that. 

The  other  character  5  always  takes  the  form  of  z,  and  has  therefore  been      5. 
printed  z  throughout.     It  is  invariably  met  with  where  our  modem  y  would 
be  used.     For  instance,  at  the  beginning  of  a  word  :  — 

zeiris  for  yeiris  =  years.  zog'  for  yog'  =  younger. 

zii  for  yii  =yet.  zaird  for  yaird  =yard. 

and  in  the  middle  of  a  word  : — tailzeour  for  tally eoiir  =  tailor. 

The  letters  n,  v.  and  w  are  often  interchanged,  one  being  written  where  U,  V,  and  W. 
we  would  now  use  the  other,  for  instance  : — 

vnforgevin  =unforgiven.  abvs  for  abus  =abuse.  V  for  U. 

vnlaw=unlaw.  v'  for  u'',  i.e.,  uther=other. 

vpon  =upon.  vmquhile  =umquhile. 

vsing  =  using.  vsual  =  usual. 

proueist  for  proveist  =  provost.        Dauid  =  David.  u  for  V. 

rpue  for  rpve  =respective.  diuers  =  divers. 

seuerall  =  several.  quhatsumeuer  =  whatsomever. 

wnto  =unto.  serwe  =  serve.  w  for  Vor  U. 

woittis  for  voittis  =  votes.  wpone  =upon. 

werie  for  verie  =very.  bwytis  for  buitis  =bits. 

fywe  for  fyve  =five.  gewin  =  given. 

pwir  for  puir=poor.  anwal  for  anual  =  annual. 

The  letter  y  will  sometimes  be  found  where  we  would  now  use  /,  e.g.,  Y  lor  I. 

poyndis  for  poindis  =  poinds, 
syluer  =  silver, 
buy  Iding  =  building. 


xxiv  DIRECTIONS  TO  READERS. 

Transposition  jhe  transposition  of  letters  is  somewhat  common.     For  instance  : — 

of  letters.  '^ 

brussar,  brussorie  =  bursar,  bursary,    exterordinari  =  extraordinary. 
brut,  brughe  =  burgh.  threttein,  threttie  =  thirteen, thirty. 

monye  =  money.  thrid  =  third . 

Spelling.  As  will  be  seen,  the  spelling  throughout  is  very  irregular.    The  same 

word  will  often  be  found  spelt  by  one  scribe  in  several  different  ways.     This 
holds  good  not  only  with  ordinary  words,  but  with  proper  names,  e.g., 

as,  als,  alse. 

baileis,  bailzeis,  baillees  =  bailies. 

brethren,  breithrine,  brethreen. 

fines,  fynes,  fynnes. 

guildry,  gildry,  gildrie. 

muskets,  muskattis,  musquetts. 

samen,  samyne,  samine,  samynn  =same. 

silver,  siluir,  syluir. 

tailor,  tailyeour,  tailzeor,  tailzeour. 

Fairie,  Farie,  Pharie. 

Jafray,  Jafra,  Jamphray. 

Merschall,  Marschell,  Marchell,  Mershell. 

Quh.  The  reader  will  notice  the  constant  use  of  qiih  to  represent  the  modem 

wh,  e.g., 

quha,  wha=who.  quhilk  =  which. 

quhais  =  whose.  quhom=whom. 

quhill  =  while.  quhinger  =  whinger  (sword). 

Terminations  Terminations  of  nouns  and  verbs  will  at  first  cause  a  httle  trouble  to  the 

reader.     In  nouns  the  ending  is  represents  the  modern  plural  endings  es  and  s, 
and  also  the  possessive  s,  e.g., 

armis  =  arms. 

houssis  =  houses. 

Godis  pleasour  =  God's  pleasure. 

In  verbs  is  will  be  found  for  s  ;  ii  for  cd  ;  and  for  ing  ;  and  in  or  ine  for 
en,  thus  : — 

is  for  s — buikis,  extendis. 
ii  for  ed — buikit,  revisit,  debursit,  agit,  askit. 
and  for  ing — awand,  reportand,  makand. 
in  or  inc  for  en — tackin,  choysine. 

Contraction;.  Contractions  are  very  numerous.    The  scribes  indicate  contractions  by 

means  of  contraction  signs,  and  of  superiors. 


DIRECTIONS  TO  READERS.  xxv 

Each  scribe  uses  a  variety  of  signs  and  of  contractions.     No  attempt  Contraction 
has  been  made  to  reproduce  in  print  the  different  styles  of  written  contraction  ^'^°*' 
signs.      One  uniform  mark   has   been   used   by  the    printer,  and   it    will   be 
found  only  where  a  contraction  sign  has  been  made  by  the  scribe.     A  word 
is  often  contracted  without  any  contraction  sign  being  used. 

A  short  stroke  printed  above  a  letter  signifies  that  a  letter  (or  letters) 
following  has  been  omitted  in  the  original,  a  contraction  sign  being  left  by  the 
writer  to  denote  the  shortening  of  the  word,  e.g.,  cu  for  cum  =come.  Where 
a  double  consonant  should  appear  in  a  word,  the  contraction  sign  may  be  found 
over  the  vowel  preceding  the  consonant,  or  over  the  consonant  itself  as,  e.g., 
suma  or  suffia  =summa  ;    hamerman  or  haiherman  =hammerman. 

The  contractions  are  for  the  most  part  quite  regular,  the  letters  most 
frequently  omitted  being,  m,  w,  om,  um,  in,  on,  ar,  air,  cr,  ri :  as  e.g., 

niiber  =nu»tber  ;    covenar  =co«venar  ; 
cmand  =  command  ;    memorand  =memorandMW  ; 
deiks  =deikms  ;   cforme  =co«forme  ; 
pticulars  =  particulars  ;  yto  =yajVto  ; 
psonaUe  =peysonaUe  ;    wttin  =w>'jttin. 

Sometimes,  however,  the  contractions  are  irregular,  syllables  or  letters 
being  left  out  in  the  middle  of  a  word  or  cut  off  from  the  end  of  it ;  as  e.g., 

magrates  =  magistrates  ;    prifill  =  ^xincipaW  ; 
repive  =  respective  ;    caor  =ca«^jo«er  ; 
simpll  =sim^\\citer  ;    not  =x\oiary. 

Superiors  are  small  letters  placed  above  the  hne  to  signify  contractions.  Superiors 
This  form  of  contraction  is  very  common  ; 

{a)  in  certain  words  of  one  syllable,  as  e.g., 

no' =nocht  =not ;    bur' =  burgh;    p'=part; 
q*  =quha  =\vho ;  q"  =  while  ;  q°  =when  ;  q'  =what ;  q''  =  where  ; 
wry'  =wright ;    smy'  =  smith  ;    w'  =with  ; 
y™  =yem  =them  ;  y"  =then  ;  y""  =  there  ;  y^  =this  ;  y'  =that ; 
(b)  in  words  of  more  than  one  syllable,  ending  with  the  letters  d,  r,  or 
i,  as  e.g.. 

Art"  =  Archibald  ;    mer'' =merchand  ; 

Ed""  =  Edinburgh  ;  m''=  master;  mess""  =  messenger  ; 

Parlia'  =  Parliament ;    pay'  =  payment ;    rece'  =receivit. 

It  should  be  noted  that  just  as  a  scribe  often  spells  the  same  word  in 
various  ways,  so  he  may  contract  the  same  word  variously,  e.g.,  umqll,  umqll, 
umq"  =umquhill. 

One  of  the  scribes  repeats  a  contraction  for  con  as  in  conveiner  and  Con. 
conform.     The   first  letter  is  clearly  a   c  and  the  second  closely  resembles 


XXVI 


DIRECTIONS  TO  READERS. 


Other  signs. 


for  tio. 


a  y.  While  the  whole  contraction  approximates  to  the  old  sign  g  =con,  the 
combination  is  more  like  cy.  Where  this  contraction  occurs,  therefore, 
it  has  been  printed  cy,  thus  : — cyveiner  for  conveiner  ;  cyform  for  conform. 

At  a  later  date  a  period,  and  sometimes  a  stroke — /,  are  also  used  to 
denote  a  contraction,  e.g., 

malt,  for  maltman.  W'hit.  for  Whitsunday, 

d.  for  deacon.  lib.  for  libra  =  pounds. 

Tho.  for  Thomas.  v/  =umquhile. 

L/  =  Lordship. 

The  curved  line,  '  represents  tio,  e.g.. 

e.xonera'un  for  exoneration.  mortifica^un. 

ca'uner  or  cau^ner.  voca'un. 

supplica'un.  e.\ecu*un. 


Rubrics. 


In  the  rubrics,  for  the  convenience  of  printing,  missing  letters  have  been 
filled  in  in  itahcs.      Many  of  the  rubrics  appear   to  have  been  written  at  a 
later  date  than  the  Minute,  although,  as  a  rule,  not  much  later.     They  may 
have  been  written  in  by  a  succeeding  scribe  to  simphfy  reference. 
Scotch  word5.  The  modem  reader  will  ha\-e  no  difficulty  in  understanding  many  of  the 

old  words  used,  such  as  :  — 

adois  =  doings. 

aithis  for  oathis  =  oaths. 

aucht  =  eight. 

aursycht  =  oversight. 

bailzeis  =baiHes. 

baxter  =  baker. 

bay  the  =both. 

beis  =be. 

brasin  =  brass. 

buik  =book. 

buird  =  board. 

but  =  without. 

chuis  and  choyse  =  choose. 

compt  =  account. 

eftir  =  after. 

fra  =from. 

fuird  =ford. 

gif=if. 

haill=  whole. 

kist  =  chest. 

litster  =  clothweaver. 

lytes  =  leets. 


DIRECTIONS  TO  READERS.  xxvii     ■ 

na=no. 

nather  =  neither. 
pienteis  =  apprentice, 
puir  =poor. 
quhais  =  whose, 
samyn  =same. 
schone  =  shoes. 
sik  =such. 
sklaittis  =  slates, 
subscryve  =  subscribe, 
tain  =  taken, 
wobster  =  weaver. 
yir  for  thir  =  these. 

Unless  where  specially  mentioned  the  figures  in  the  cash  columns  and  Money  and 

°  J  .,,.  Numbers, 

throughout  the  book  represent  Scots  money.  To  reduce  pounds,  shillmgs, 
and  pence  to  sterhng  money,  one  must  divide  by  12.  The  merk  is  equal  to 
13/4  Scots. 

In  the  early  part  of  the  book  the  figures  are  usually  expressed  in  Roman 
numerals.  The  pounds  are  preceded  or  followed  by  the  contraction  lib.  or  li, 
representing  librae=  pounds.  The  shilling  figures  are  followed  by  s.,  and  the 
pence  by  d.  It  will  be  noticed  that  where  the  last  Roman  numeral  is  an  i, 
it  is  extended  downwards  until  it  forms  a  j,  thus  :— viij  =  eight. 

When  ordinary  numerals  come  to  be  used  in  the  accounts,  additional 
ciphers  are  found  written  before  the  numerals  in  each  column.  The  pounds 
are  usually  written  in  not  less  than  four  figures,  and  the  shillings  and  pence 
in  not  less  than  two  figures  each,  thus  : — 

0008    06    08  for    £8    6    8 
0066     13    04  for  £66  13    4 

In  a  few  accounts  these  ciphers  have  been  printed  in  full  as  specimens. 
In  the  remainder  the  extra  ciphers  have  been  omitted. 

The  year  will  often  be  found  expressed  with  the  help  of  a  corrupt  con- 
traction representing  1600,  which  should  possibly  have  been  written  imvic, 
i.e.,  i  (one),  m  (thousand),  vi  (six),  c  (hundred),  but  is  written  instead  iaivic — 
or  more  commonly  jaivjc  or  jajvic. 

Round  brackets  (  )  denote  that  there  is  a  blank  left  in  Brackets,  etc. 

the  original  writing. 

Square  brackets  [  ]  denote  that  the  original  writing  is 

undecipherable. 

Square  brackets  [  ]  with  a  word  or  words  between,  denote 

that  the  words  have  been  supplied. 

A  series  of denotes  that  the  writing  has  been  worn  away, 

or  the  paper  torn  or  amissing. 


d^.  f. 


ft  -  ,  M 


a^  *  c 


v: 


^  s 


-  I 


^ 


=^ 


^ 


^5 


^ 


_  1.     ^, 


The     Records 

of 

The     Trades     House     of    Glasgow 

as  contained  in 

The   First   Minute   Book   of  the   House 
1605-1678 


*  [March  1605.] 

Quhilk  daye  anent  ye  poyndis  of  ye  hemirme  yat  ar  poyndit  be  Johnne  Anent 
Wilsoun  officiar  in  ye  tyme  yat  David  Pollok  was  yair  dekin  and  [quhilk]  hein'rnirm'n 
poyndis  ar  in  ye  said  Johnne  maintenance  the  counsall  of  ye  dekin  deput 
convenar  ordenis  the  said  David  to  delyveir  ye  said  poyndis  to  ye  said  dekin 
(leput  convenar  incontinent  heireftir  and  quhill  ye  said  Johnne  Wilsoun  be 
satesfeit  for  his  paines  ordanis  him  to  hald  in  his  hand  ane  of  ye  said  poyndis. 

Quhilk  daye  Symot  Bard  gratis  him  to  have  ressavit  fra  David  Pollok  SymotmtBard 
last  dekin  to  ye  hemirmen  the  sowme  of  fourtie  schillingis  for  his  feye  quhilk  DaW^PoiiSk. 
IS  cotenit  in  ane  rolmot  ye  said  Symount  obtenit  aganis  ye  said  David  before 
ye  baillies  of  Glasgw  and  dischargis  ye  said  David  of  ye  said  fourtie  s.  be  yir 
pntis. 

Quhilk  daye  compeirit  psonalie  George  Brysoun  James  Culane  and  James  Brysoun 
Lowk  meilmen  as  warnit  to  compeir  before  ye  dekin  deput  convenar  and  his  ^"\^.^^ 
counsall  becaus  yai  had  no'  compeirit  before  ye  visitour  of  ye  maltmen  and 
meilmen  and  his  cosallars  to  acknawledge  him  and  yame  as  become  and  to 
give  yair  aiths  to  yat  effect,  quhilks  George  James  and  James  willinglie 
acknawledgis  ye  said  visitour  and  his  counsallaris  and  gave  aithe  for  obedience 
to  him  and  yame  his  and  yair  successouris  in  tymes  to  cum. 

The  Quhilk  daye  the  dekin  deput  covenar  and  his  counsall  ordenis  ye  Visitour  of  ye 

visitour  of  ye  maltmen  and  meilmen  to  give  in  yis  daye  xv  dayes  before  yame  JJJei'i'm  "^^  ^""^ 

•The  first  entry  printed,  dated  March,  1605,  was  not  the  first  entry  in  the  written  Minute  Book. 
There  is,  at  least,  one  leaf  missing. 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1605 


Patersone 
Bog  ill 
Bar. 


the  cotributioun  collectit  be  ye  said  maitmen  and  meilmen  to  the    craftis 
hospitall. 

Quhilk  daye  becaus  yat  Peter  Patersone  George  Bogill  and  Johnne  Bar 
hes  bein  warnit  be  Johnne  Wilsoune  officiar  to  have  compeirit  yis  daye  before 
ye  dekin  deput  covenar  and  his  counsall  under  ye  paine  of  fourtie  schilhngis 
money  to  everie  ane  of  yame  and  yai  copeirit  no*  yis  pnt  daye  and  yai  being 
aftymes  callit  [who]  wer  warnit  did  no'  copeir  eftir  lang  avaitting  wpone  thair 
coperances,  q^'by  yai  shewe  yameselfis  disobedientis.  Thairfor  ye  said  dekin 
deput  convenar  and  his  counsall  ordanis  yat  ye  said  Johnne  Wilsoun  poynd 
ye  saidis  Peter  George  and  Johnne  and  ilk  ane  of  yame  for  fourtie  schillingis 
incotinet  heireftir  and  requeistis  ye  baillies  of  yis  bur'  and  citie  to  intpone  y 
authoritie  to  yis  yair  decreit. 


Kincaid. 


Contrair 
Mwire 


Secundo  die  mesis  Aprilis  1605. 

Quhilk  daye  Thomas  Kincaid  maltma  burges  of  Glasgw  sworne  be  his 
greit  aithe  acknawledget  the  visitour  of  ye  maitmen  and  meOme  and  his 
cosallaris  w'in  yis  bur'  and  promeisit  to  him  and  yam  and  y  successouris 
obedience  in  all  tymes  to  cum. 

The  dekin  deput  coveinar  and  his  cosall  is  cleirlie  informit  y'  W  M""  quha 
comes  out  of  Scheddilstoun  wsis  ane  friemanis  occupatioun  in  making  of  malt 
w'in  ye  friedom  of  yis  bur'  and  noHv%tanding  yof  refusis  to  acknawledge  the 
visitour  of  ye  maltme  and  meilme  and  his  cosalaris  w'in  yis  bur',  thairfoir  ye 
dekin  deput  covenar  ordenis  ye  said  W  to  find  sourtie  under  ye  pae  of  xl  ll 
(  )  nixt   to   cum   to  abstein   fra   ane  friemanis  occupa'un   in 

making  of  malt  [until]  he  first  acknawledge  ye  visitour  of  ye  maltme  and 
meilme  and  his  cosallaris  and  requeistis  the  mgratis  of  yis  bur'  to  interpone 
yair  authoritie  to  yis  yair  decreit. 


He  yat  is  no' 
a  gildbrother 
sail  bruik  na 
office. 


Vigesimo  octauo  die  mensis  Maij  1605. 

Quhilk  daye  the  dekin  deput  covenar  and  his  cosall  thinkis  it  expedient 
that  ye  haill  dekinis  of  ye  craftis  visitour  of  ye  maitmen  and  meilmen 
coUectour  of  ye  garneris  be  warnit  to  be  pnt  ye  nixt  Twysdaye  to  convein 
w'  yame  to  ye  effect  wnderwrittin  quhilk  is  this,  that  seing  yai  ar 
mony  of  ye  craftis  maitmen  meilmen  marineris  fischeris  and  garneris 
quha  ar  no'  as  zit  gildbrether  nether  intendis  to  be  that  be  vniuersall 
consent  yair  be  ane  act  set  doun  yat  yai  of  ye  saidis  craftis  maitmen  meilmen 
marineris  fischeris  and  garneris  quha  is  no'  as  zit  gildbrether  nether  salbe 
before  ye  t3nTie  to  be  set  doun  be  ye  deane  of  gild  and  his  cosall  expyre  be 
never  promottit  to  bruik  ony  office  amang  yame  as  to  be  dekin  convenar  dekin 
of  craft  visitour  or  coUectour  nether  maister  of  craft  on  ye  dekin    covenar 


i6o5]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  3 

cosall  or  his  deput  or  a  counsallour  to  ye  said  visitour  assistar  to  ye  said 
collectour  nether  to  have  ony  woitt  of  ye  electioun  of  a  dekin  of  his  craft  dekin 
convenar  visitour  or  collectour  in  ony  tyme  to  cu. 

Decimo  ociauo  die  mlsis  Junij  1605. 

Quhilk  daye  the  dekin  deput  covenar  and  his  counsall  w'  ye  dekins  of  ye  Approbatioun 
baxteris   tailzouris  skynneris   cowperis  masonis  bonnetmakeris  wreichtis  w*  yi  J^^^^  ^ 
ye  visitour  of  ye  maltmen  and  meilmen  hes  statut  and  ordanit  as  be  yir  pntis  f^^^^^^^^l^ 
statutis  and  ordanis  that  quhaeveir  yai  be  amang  yair  craftis  and  trades  yat  office. 
ar  no'  as  zit  gildbrether  be  neveir  heireftir  dekin  convenar  dekin  deput  covenar 
dekin  of  craft  visitour  or  collectour   maistir  of  craft  on  ye  dekin  convenar  or 
his  deput  cosall  or  a  counsallour  to  ye  said  visitour  assistar  to  ye  said  collectour 
nether  have  ony  woitt  at  ye  electioun  of  ye  dekin  of  his  craft  dekin  covenar 
visito'  or  collectour  in  ony  tyme  to  cum. 

Vigesimo  tertio  die  mensis  Jidij  1605. 

Quhilk  daye  the  dekin  deput  convenar  and  his  cosall  and  haill  dekinis  The  tyme  of 
hes  statut  and  ordanit  and  be  yir  pntis  statutis  and  ordanis  that  yair  be  ane  m'of'yecraftis 
maister  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  chosen  zeirlie  the  same  werie  daye  the  dekin  hospitali. 
convenar  beis  chosen  in  all  tymes,  and  pntlie  ye  said  dekin  deput  covenar 
his  cosall  and  dekinis  foirsaid  hes  chosen  IVf  Peter  Lowe  maistir  of  ye  said 
craftis  hospitall  wnto  ye  tyme  ye  said  dekin  covenar  beis  chosen  yis  zeir  ye 
daye  of  ye  electioun  appointtit  yto. 

Quhilk  daye  Johnne  Govane  is  imbuikit  prenteis  to  Patrik  Gemill  elder  Govane 
skynner.  v^tntei^. 

Secundo  die  mesis  Augustj  1605. 

Quhilk  daye  Johnne  Somervell  is  imbuikit  prenteis  to  Niniane  Andersone  Somervell 
dekin  of  ye  cordoneris.  prenteis. 

Quarto  die  mesis  Odobris  1605. 

Quhilk  daye  compeirit  personalie  Johnne  Scot  dekin  of  ye  hemirmen  The  maneir  of 
Williame  Neisbit  dekin  of  ye  tailzouris  Alexander  Cauldwell  dekin  of  ye  personesliobe 
skynneris  Thomas  Fawsyde  dekin  of  ye  baxteris  Archibald  Patersone  dekin  on  lytes  w'ye 

■'  J  J  ^\i\A  dekm 

of  ye  wobstens  WiUiame  Mure  dekm  of  ye  fleschouns  Gavin  Nasmyt  dekin  of  convenar. 
ye  bonnetmakeris  David  Scheirar  for  Johnne  Hall  dekin  of  ye  cowperis  James 
Elphinstoun  for  hx^  Reid  dekin  of  ye  wreichtis  and  Williame  Dunlop  for  Andro 
Boyd  dekin  of  ye  masonis,  the  dekin  of  ye  cordoneris  being  fur*  of  ye  toun 
and  dekin  of  ye  chirurgenaris  being  absent  warnit  to  yis  daye.  As  siclyk 
copeirit  Jo"  Wallace  visitour  of  ye  maltme  and  meilmen  Johnne  M''  skipper 
collectour  of  ye  marineris  and  Johnne  Govane  collectour  of  ye  garneris  quha 
wnderstanding  according  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie  that  twa  suld  be  chosen  with 


4  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1605 

ye  auld  dekin  convenar  to  be  gevin  in  in  lytes  before  proweist  baillies  and 
counsall  and  haill  dekinis  of  craftis  and  yair  assistaiis  quha  sail  mak  chose 
of  ane  of  yame  to  be  dekin  covenar  for  yis  zeir  following  and  yat  ye  same 
daye  aucht  dayes  eftir  ye  baillies  of  yis  bur*  beis  chosen,  for  cheising  of  yir 
twa  to  be  gevin  in  lytes  in  maneir  foirsaid  the  foirsaid  dekinis  and  supplearis 
of  ye  dekinis  absence  foirsaid  visitour  and  collectouris  foirsaid  w'  nyne  wther 
persones  to  mak  out  xxiiij  persones  in  ye  haill  to  wit  Johnne  Andersone  auld 
baillie  w*  M''  Peter  Lowe  M^  Robert  Hammiltoun  James  Braidwood  James 
Lichtbodie  James  Fischere  and  Richard  Kirkland  of  ye  dekin  convenaris 
cosall  and  Gavin  Hammiltoun  and  Johnne  Scot  baxter  be  rankit  and  put 
foorthe  in  foure  seuerall  rankis  and  ane  of  ye  sex  in  ye  rank  to  be  haldin  out 
and  sua  foure  of  ye  haill  to  be  taine  out  and  out  of  yir  foure  twa  to  be  chosen 
w'  ye  auld  dekin  covenar  to  be  gevin  in  in  lytes  in  maneir  foirsaid,  and  yairfoir 
yai  put  yir  psones  eftir  following  in  rank  as  followis,  to  wit — 


Twa  put  on 
lytes  w'  ye 
auld  dekin 
convenar. 


Johnne  Andersone 

auld  baillie 
Johnne  Scot  dekin 
Williame  Spang 
James  Braidwod 
James  Fischeir 
Niniane  Andersone 


M'  Peter  Lowe 
Wi  Neisbit 
Jo"  Mr  skipper 
W  Mr 

Thomas  Fausyd 
Johnne  Hall 


Jo"  Wallace 
Alex''  Cauldwell 
James  Ly'bodie 
Jo°  Go vane 
Gavin  Nasmy' 
Andro  Boyd 


Archibald  Reid 
Archibald  Patersoun 
Richard  Kirkland 
Gavin  Hamiltoun 
Mr  Robert  Hamiltoun 
Jo°  Scot  baxter 


Of  ye  quhilkis  twentie  foure  persones  be  pluralitie  of  woittis  it  is  concludit 
y'  James  Braidwood  Jo°  M^  skipper  Jo°  Wallace  and  Gavin  Hamiltoun  byd 
out  and  againe  ye  haill  woittis  being  socht  quhilk  twa  of  yir  foure  persones 
salbe  chosen  w'  ye  auld  dekin  covenar  to  be  put  in  lytes  in  maneir  foirsaid. 

Quhilk  daye  the  dekins  of  ye  craftis  and  yair  assisteris  [have  chosen] 
James  Braidwood  and  Johnne  Mwir  skipper  w'  ye  auld  dekin  covenar  to  be 
gevin  in  in  lyttis  before  ye  proweist  baillies  and  counsall  and  haill  dekinis  of 
craftis  and  yair  assisteris  in  ye  counsallhous  ye  aucht  daye  of  October  instant 
quha  sail  mak  chois  of  ane  of  yame  to  be  dekin  covenar  for  ye  zeir  nixt 
heireftir  following  according  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie. 


Dekin 

convenaris 
counsall. 


Decinio  septimo  die  mesis  Octohris  1605. 

Quhilk  daye  James  Braidwood  dekin  covenar  hes  noiat  ye  haill  dekins 
of  ye  craftis  the  visitour  of  \^e  maltmen  and  meilmen  Johnne  Andersone  Johnne 
Muir  skipper  M'  Peteir  Lowe  James  Fischeir  James  Ly'bodie  M''  Robert 
Hamiltoun  Gavin  Hamiltoun  Johnne  Govane  and  Jo°  Merchell  to  be  his 
counsellours  to  convein  w'  him  and  to  advyse  in  all  thingis  yat  sail  concerne 
ye  glorie  of  God  the  weale  of  yis  bur'  and  yair  particular  weale  no*  hurtand 
ye  weale  of  ony  wther  within  yis  bur*. 


i6o5]         RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  5 

Ouhilk  daye  covenil  James  Braidwood  dekin  covenar  Jo"  Scot  dekiu  of 
the  hemirme  W  Neisbit  dekin  of  ye  tailzouris  Niniane  Andersone  dekin  of 
ye  cordoneris  Thomas  Fawsyd  dekin  of  ye  baxteris  Ar^  Pateisone  dekin  of 
ye  wobsteris  Alex''  Cauldwell  dekin  of  ye  skynneris  Andio  Boyd  dekin  of  ye  ■ 
masonis  Ar''  Reid  dekin  of  ye  wreichtis  Jo"  Hall  dekin  of  ye  cowperis  and  Jo° 
Wallace  visitour  of  ye  maltmen  and  meilmen  and  put  yir  persones  eftir 
following  extending  to  ye  nobeir  of  xxiiij  in  audit  seuerall  rakis  y'  fur'  yairof 
aucht  persones  [be  chosen]. 

Williame  Spang         IW  Peter  Lowe    Jo"  Andersoun      Jo"  M.^ 
Diicane  Sempill         James  Ly'bodie  James  Fischer       Jo"  Wallace 
Gavin  Nasmy'  Jo"  Mchell  Gavin  Hamiltoun  Andro  Boyd 

Niniane  Andersoun   Jo"  Scot  dekin     Thomas  Fausyde  M''  Rob'  Hamiltou 
W'  Neisbit  Jo"  Govan  Ar'*  Patersone        Jo"  Scot  baxter 

Jo"  Hall  Alexf  Cauldv'       Ar^  Reid  Jo"  Richie  cowper 

Quhilkis  twentie  foure  persones  being  remowit  yai  ar  all  brocht  in  except  On  ye  deane 
aucht  persones  to  wit,  Duncane  Sempill  M''  Peter  Lowe  Jo"  Andersone  auld  co«nsail. 
baillie  Jo"  IVf  skipper  Ninian  Andersone  Johnne  Scot  dekin  Thomas  Fausyd 
M''  Rob'  Hamiltoun  and  thir  foirsaid  aucht  persones  being  removit  then  ye 
dekin  covenar  and  his  cosall  woittit  quhilk  of  foure  of  yame  suld  be  on  ye  deane 
of  gild  cosall  and  eftir  yat  yair  haill  woittis  wer  seueralie  socht  to  everie  ane 
of  ye  said  aucht  persones  Duncane  Sempill  M""  Peter  Lowe  Jo"  Andersone  and 
Johnne  M''  skipper  be  woittis  prevailed. 

Quhilk  daye  the  dekin  covenar  and  his  cosall  hes  noiat  and  electit  Diicae 
Sempill  M''  Peter  Lowe  Johnne  Andersone  auld  baillie  and  Johnne  Mwir  skipper 
to  be  on  ye  deane  of  gildis  cosall  and  to  covein  w'  him  according  to  ye  lettir 
of  gildrie  wnto  ye  next  electioun  of  ye  said  deane  of  gild  and  in  ye  absence  of 
ye  said  Duncane  Sempill  ordenis  Thomas  Fawsj^de  dekin  of  ye  baxteris  to 
supplie  his  place. 

Vigesimo  secuudo  die  niesis  Odohris  1605. 
Quhilk  daye  the  dekin  convenar  and  his  counsall  ordenis  M""  Peter  Lowe  Anent 
to  produce  v\pone  the  penult  daye  of  October  instat  the  haill  writtis  quhilk  fvritt'isbrM"' 
he  hes  yat  pertenis  to  ye  craftis  hospitall  to  be  sein  and  cosiderit  and  thaireftir  Peter  Lowe 

....  .        .  .  f  •      1  1       r        1  perteniKg  to 

immediathe  to  be  miput  m  ye  craftis  box  to  be  furthecumand  to  ye  weale  ye  craftis 
of  ye  said  hospitall,  the  said  maistir  Peter  warn  it  apud  ache  to  the  effect  '^°^p"^"- 
foirsaid. 

The  dekin  convenar  and  his  counsall  ordenis  that  he  and  yai  meitt  on  ye  Anent  ye 
Weddinsdaye  at  sevin  houris  in  ye  morning  in  ye  New  Kirk  monethhe  for  convenar 
intreating  of  the  effairis  pertening  to  yame  and  yat  offer  yai  meit  as  occasioun  ^"'^  'j'^.. 
salbe  offred  being  warnit  personalie  be  ye  of&ciar  to  yat  effect  wnder  3'e  paines  meitting. 
set  doun  alreadie  aganis  the  abscnttis. 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1605 


Craftismen  y' 
makis  malt  or 
raeill  to  pave 
to  ye  visito'of 
ye  maltmen 
and  meiltnert 
viij  d.  for  ilk 
making  of 
malt  and  as 
mekill  for  ilk 
crop  of  aittis. 


J  ohnne 
Wallace 
coUectour 
compt  hard. 


The  dekin  convenar  and  his  counsall  ordenis  yat  ye  craftismen  w'in  vis 
bur'  quha  makis  malt  or  meih  be  warnit  to  compeir  before  him  and  his  said 
counsall  at  everie  quarter  conventioun  to  produce  then  swa  mony  aucht 
penneis  for  ilk  making  of  malt  and  crop  of  aittis  yai  have  maid  and  dryit 
betuix  yat  quarter  conventioun  and  the  quarter  conventioun  nixt  and 
immediatlie  going  before  to  be  delyverit  to  3'e  visitour  of  ye  maltmen  and 
meilmen  for  ye  weale  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  and  releiff  of  j'air  comoun  charges 
and  quhasoeuer  of  ye  said  craftismen  yat  makis  malt  or  meill  salbe  warnit 
to  compeir  as  said  is  and  compeiris  no'  sail  paye  to  ye  collectour  of  ye  craftis 
and  yair  assisteris  ye  sowme  of  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  \Tiforgevin. 

Prima  die  nu'sis  Novembris  1605. 
Ouhilk    da3'e    Johnne    \Vallace    collectour   copt    being    hard    his    charge 
extendis  to  threttie  aucht  pundis  auchtein  s.  viij  d.,  quha  dischargis  him  of  ye 
sowme  of  threttie  foure  ll  xv  s.  iiij  d.  swa  he  restis  au'ad  the  sowme  of  foure  % 
fyve  s.  viij  d.  quhairof  ye  said  Jo"  delyverit  to  James  Richie  sex  s.  viij  d. 


Put  on  lytes 
to  be  dekin 


On  ye  dekin 
convenar  his 
counsall. 


Anent  futting 
of 

contribution 
for  ye 
buylding  of 
ye  craftis 
hospitall 
farder. 


Vigesimo  nono  die  mesis  Decembris  1606. 
Ouhilk  daye  the  dekinis  of  ye  craitis  and  yair  assisteris  hes  chosin  Niniane 
Andersone  and  Thomas  Fawsyde  w'  ye  auld  dekin  covenar  to  be  gevin  in  in 
lytes  before  ye  baillies  and  cosale  and  haill  dekinis  of  craftis  and  yair  assisteris 
in  ye  cosalehous  jas  pnt  daye  quha  sail  mak  chose  of  ane  of  yae  to  be  dekin 
covenar  for  ye  zeir  nixt  heireftir  following  according  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie. 

Decimo  sepiimo  die  mesis  Mariij  1607. 
Ouhilk  daye  James  Braidwood  dekin  covenar    hes  noiat  to  be  on  his 
counsall  the  haill  dekinis  of  ye  craftis  visitour  of  ye  maltmen  and  meilmen 
togidder  w'  Johnne  Andersone  Duncane  Sempill  Johnne  Muir  James  Fischere 
Valter  Dowglas  and  John  Richie. 

Decimo  octauo  die  mensis  Martij  1607. 
Ouhilk  daye  jjersonahe  present  the  dekin  covenar  the  dekinis  of  \'e  craftis 
visitour  of  ye  maltmen  and  meilmen  w'  Johnne  Andersone  Duncane  Sempill 
Johnne  Muir  James  Fischere  and  Valter  Dowglas  quha  all  cocludis  and  aggreis 
that  yair  be  ane  voluntare  cotributioun  socht  and  requirit  fra  ye  craftis  and 
yair  assistaris  for  ye  buylding  fordward  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  and  y'  everie 
dekin  of  craft  and  ye  said  visitour  of  maltme  and  meilme  seik  and  require 
ye  said  voluntair  cotributioun  fra  ye  brethrene  of  craftis  maltme  and  meilme 
and  covein  his  brether  to  yat  effect  and  y'  ye  dekinis  of  ye  baxteris  and 
skynneris  covein  ye  morne  before  nwi  w'  ye  dekin  of  ye  wobsteris  to  ye  effect 
foirsaid,  the  dekinis  of  ye  tailzouris  fleschouris  and  cowperis  ye  morne  eft 
nwi,  the  visitour  of  ye  maltmen  and  meilmen  dekins  of  ye  wrehtis  and  hemirme 

•  .-\  leaf  appears  to  be  missing  here  from  the  written  Minute  Book. 


1607J        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  7 

on  Saterday  before  nwi  and  ye  dekinis  of  ye  bonnetmakeris  chirurgeanis  and 
masonis  on  Saterday  eftir  nwi  to  ye  said  effect. 

Quhilk  daye  the  dekin  covenar  dekinis  of  craftis  and  visitour  of  ye  maltmen  Anent 
and  meilmen  hes  thocht  it  meit  and  expedient  that  ye  dekin  convenar  Johnne  w'Te^deane  of 
Andersone  Duncane  Sempill  Jo"  M'  Johnne  Richie  James  Ly^bodie    James  ^^^^^^^^  ^^ 
Fischere  Niniane  Andersone  Thomas  Fawsyde  or  in  yair  absence  ony  wther  ra»k  for 
in  yair  steade  at  ye  dekin  covenar  his  arbitremet  covein  w*  ye  deane  of  gild  how  ye  dett 
and  aucht  me  w'  him  of  ye  merchand  rak  at  ony  coveniet  tyme  heireftir  and  ^^/"^y^  n°ay 
give  yair  overture  how  ye  dett  lyand  wpone  ye  toun  may  be  payit.  be  payit. 

Vigesimo  quarto  die  mesis  Marti j  1607. 

Ouhilk  daye  it  is  c5discendit  wpone  be  ye  dekin  covenar  dekinis  of  craftis  Anent  hairing 
and  visitour  of  ye  maltme  and  meilme  that  M''  Peter  Lowe  mak  his  copt  ye  Lowe  compt. 
nixt  Thurisdaye  immediathe  eft  the    preiching  w'in  ye   Blakfreir   Kirk  and 
yat  he  be  vvarnit  to  yt  effect  and  yat  Matthew  Cambroun  be  warnit  to  ye  said 
daye  and  place  and  that  ye  auld  dekinis  w'  wtheris  of  ye  craftis  yat  desyres 
to  heir  ye  said  copt  be  pnt  ye  said  daye  to  heir  ye  saming. 

Prima  die  mensis  Aprilis  1607. 

Quhilk  daye  compeirit  M''  Peter  Lowe  and  producit  ye  haill  writtis  he  Anent  M' 
had  in  his  custodie  that  concernis  ye  hospitall  foundit  be  wmq"  M^  Rolland  deiyveriefra 
Blacattour  w'  ye  richtis  of  ve  landis  bocht  fra  Alex''  Stewart  to  bie  von  the  '^™  °*  P ,  , 

.       -'  ■^  °  -'  wnttishenad 

craftis  hospitall  at  ye  foir  front  and  yard  adjacet  y''to  w*  the  band  wpone  ye  in  his  handis. 
craftis  maltme  and  meilmen  of  y'  zeirlie  silueir  yai  for  yae  and  y  successors 
ar  bund  to  ye  said  craftis  hospitall  w*  Johnne  Hewesonis  ry'is  maid  be  him 
to  ye  said  craftis  of  ye  Lard  of  Ernokis  landis  and  ye  said  M^  Johnne  gift  to 
ye  said  hospitall  w'  his  ry*  to  (  )  Walker  his  hous  and  sindrie 

wther  writtis  according  to  a  minute  yof  qlks  haill  writtis  wer  put  in  ye  box 
pertenig  to  ye  dekin  covenar  dekinis  of  craftis  visitour  of  ye  maltme  and 
meilme  to  be  fur'cQand  to  the  wses  ye  said  richtis  servis  and  ar  maid  to. 

Quhilk  daye  M'  Peter  Lowe  charge  of  his  intromissioun  extendis  to  twa  m'  peter 
hundrethe  ane  %  twa  s.  iiij  d.  quha  dischargis  him.  ^°"'*^  charge. 

Quhilk  daye  James  Lichtbodie  visitour  of  ye  maltme  and  meilmen  for  James 
him  and  yame  promeisis  in  his  and  yair  names  for  ye  buylding  fordwart  of  ye  promeis  of 
craftis  hospitall  the  sowme  of  fiftie  pundis  money  to  be  furtcuand  to  ye  said  ?*'',ii'''' '°  ^^ 
wse  how  sone  ye  dekins  of  ye  craftis  agrie  for  yair  awin  partis  bringis  fordwart  fordwart  of 
yair  cotributioun  rpue  for  ye  farder  buylding  of  ye  said  hospitall.  hos"ka'ih 

Quhilk  daye  Alexander  Cauldwell  dekin  of  ye  skynneris  for  himself  and  Alex' 
ye  brethrein  of  his  craft  promeisis  for  him  and  yae  to  ye  buylding  fordwart  deki'n  of  ye 
of  ye  craftis  hospitall    the  sowme  of    twentie  iiikis  money  to  be  furtcuand  skynneris 

.  ^  .,        .  r  ,■  ■  promeis  of 

With  ye  cotnbution  of  ye  rest  of  ye  craftis  to  ye  effect  foirsaid.  twentie 

merkis. 


8 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1607 


Decimo  septimo  die  niesis  Aprilis  1607. 

Quhilk  daye  James  Braidwood  dekin  convenar  and  ye  dekinis  of  ye  craftis 

hes  appointtit  and  be  yir  pntis  appointtis  James  Lichtbodie  collectour  of  ye 

contributioun  to  be  ingaderit  fra  ye  dekinis  of    ye  craft  ye    said    James  as 

contributioun.  visito''  of  ye  maltme  and  meilme  and  wtheris  quhatsumeveir  for  ye  farder 

buylding  of  ye  craftis  hospital! . 


James 
Lichtbodie 
appoiatit 
collectour 
of  ye 


Johnne 
Andersone 
requeistit  to 
attend  wpone 
ye  buylding 
of  ye  craftis 
hospitall. 


James 
Ly'bodie 
recept  of  xl  s. 


Quhilk  daye  the  dekin  covenar  dekinis  of  ye  craftis  and  visitour  of  ye 
maltmen  and  meilme  requeistis  Johnne  Andersone  auld  baillie  to  attend  wpone 
ye  buylding  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  fordwart  q"  ye  samig  be  copleittit. 

Vigesimo  tcrtio  die  mesis  Aprilis  1607. 

Quhilk  daye  James  Lichtbodie  collectour  of  ye  cotributioun  to  ye 
buylding  fordward  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  ressavit  fra  Johnne  Mwir  skipper 
fourtie  s.  money. 


And  of  sex  lib.  Item  ye  said  James  ressavit  ye  said  daye  fra  George  Mwir  mchand  to  ye 

helping  fordward  of  ye  buylding  of  ye  said  hospitall  sex  pundis  money. 


W  Wilsoun 
dekin  of  the 
tailzouris 
promise  of 
fourtie  lib. 

Ninian 
Andersone 
dekin  of  ye 
cordoneris 
promeis  of 
fiftie  me^'kis. 

Promise  of 
twetttie  lib. 
for  ye 
cowperis. 


Dekin  of  ye 
hemmirm;» 
promise  of 
tweijtie  lib. 


Dekin  of  ye 
wobsteris 
promise  of 
ten  lib. 


Dekin  of  ye 
bonnet- 
makeris 
promise  of 
ten  merkis. 

David 
Scheirair 
promise  of 
thrie  lib. 


Quhilk  daye  W  Wilsoun  dekin  of  the  tailzo''s  for  him  and  his  craft 
promeisis  to  ye  buylding  fordwart  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  fourtie  li  money. 

Qlk  daye  Niniae  Andersone  dekin  of  ye  cordoneris  for  him  and  his  craft 
promeisis  to  ye  buylding  fordwart  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  ye  sowme  of  fiftie 
merkis  money. 

Quhilk  daye  Jo^  Richie  for  himself  and  in  ye  nae  of  ye  cowperis  his  brether 
of  craft  promeisis  to  ye  buylding  fordwart  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  the  sowme 
of  twetie  pundis  money. 

Qlk  daye  Peter  Lymburner  dekin  of  ye  hemirme  for  himself  and  the 
brethieine  of  his  craft  promeisis  to  ye  buylding  fordward  of  ye  craftis  hospitall 
ye  sowme  of  twetie  li  money. 

Qlk  daye  Richard  Kirkland  dekin  of  ye  wobsteris  promeisis  for  him  and 
his  craft  to  ye  buylding  fordwart  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  ye  sowme  of  ten  li 
money. 

Qlk  daye  Johnne  Brounsyde  dekin  of  ye  bonnetmakeris  for  him  and  his 
craft  promeisis  to  ye  buylding  fordwart  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  ye  sowme  of 
ten  mkis  money. 

Qlk  daye  it  is  declairit  y'  David  Scheirair  promeisit  of  ye  sea  silueir  for 
ye  buylding  fordwart  of  ye  said  craftis  hospitall  ye  sowm  of  thrie  li  monej'. 


i607]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  9 

Vigesimo  prinio  die  meiisis  Maij  1607. 
Quhilk  daye  personalie  present  w'in  ye  College  Kirk  of  Glasgw  James  Act  maid 
Braidwood  dekin  convenar  Peter  Lymburner  dekin  of  the  hemirme  Thomas  masonisand 
Fawsyde  dekin  of  ye  baxteris  Williae  Wilsoun  dekin  of  ye  tailzouris  Niniane  weichtis. 
Andersone  dekin  of  ye  cordoneris  Richard  Kirkland  dekin  of  ye  wobsteris 
Alexander  Cauldwell  dekin  of  ye  skynneris  Robert  Watsoun  dekin  of  ye 
fleschouris  Johnne  Brownsyde  dekin  of  ye  bonnetmakeris  Williame  Spang 
dekin  of  ye  chirurgeanis  Williame  Dulop  dekin  of  ye  masonis  and  James 
Elphinstoun  dekin  of  ye  wreichtis  being  present  also,  quhilkis  dekin  covenar  and 
nyne  dekinis  aboue\Tittin  finding  ane  controuersie  to  arise  betuix  ye  masonis 
and  wreichtis  anent  ye  sclaitting  of  ane  peice  of  Johnne  Baba  foirlandis  within 
ye  said  bur*  be  Robert  Petegru  Archibald  Reid  and  Willia  Reid  burgess  of  ye 
said  bur'  and  wreichtis  of  yair  craft  and  y'  ye  dekin  of  ye  masonis  and  his 
brether  of  craft  interprysed  to  staye  ye  work  began  to  be  wrocht  be  ye  said 
wreichtis,  the  said  dekin  covenar  and  dekinis  of  ye  said  craftis  covenit  to 
remowe  yis  cotroversie  hes  concludit  and  set  doun  that  ye  saidis  Robert 
Archibald  and  Williame  work  out  ye  said  Johnne  Baba  work  begun  be  yae 
wpone  w'  all  expeditioun  for  his  furtherance  and  for  putting  ane  end  to  ye 
said  controuersie  betuix  ye  saidis  masonis  and  wreichtis  the  said  dekin  covenar 
and  dekinis  of  craftis  hes  decernit  as  be  yir  pntis  deliberatis  to  covein  as  neid 
sail  require  betuix  ye  dait  heiroff  and  the  first  daye  of  August  nixt  to  cu  and 
advisedlie  to  set  doun  ane  setled  ordo'  betuix  ye  saidis  masonis  and  wreichtis 
anet  sclaitting  of  houss  poynting  yof  and  wther  poyntis  belanging  be  sclaitt 
and  poyntting  to  mak  and  hald  ye  samig  watterticht.  And  farder  ye  said 
dekin  covenar  and  dekinis  of  craftis  dischargis  ye  saidis  wreichtis  wpon  yair 
obedience  to  tak  ony  task  of  new  work  wirking  heireftir  q"  first  decreit  and 
determina^un  be  set  doun  be  yame  haveand  power  and  authoritie  betuix  ye 
saidis  masonis  and  wreichtis  anet  ye  said  cotrovsie  and  that  advisedlie  for 
quietnes  betuix  ye  saidis  masonis  and  wreichtis. 

Decimo  tertio  die  mensis   Odohris   1607. 
Quhilk  daye  the  dekinis  of  ye  craftis  within  yis  bur*  and  yair  assisteris  Put  on  lyttis 
convenit  in  ye  counsallhous  of  ye  said  bur*  hes  chosen  Niniane  Andersone  co«venar.'" 
and  Thomas  Morsoun  w'  ye  auld  dekin  covenar  to  be  ge\'in  in  in  lites  before 
ye  proweist  baillies  and  cosall  and  haill  dekinis  of  ye  craftis  and  thair  assisteris 
yis  pnt  daye  in  ye  said  counsalhous  quha  sail  mak  chose  of  ane  of  yame  to  be 
dekin  covenar  for  ye  zeir  nixt  heireft  following  according  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie. 

Vigesimo  secundo  die  mesis  Odohris  1607. 
Quhilk  daye  the  dekin  covenar  and  his  cosall  hes  noiat  and  electit  Robert  On  ye  deane 
Rowat    Jo""  Andersone  James  Lichtbodie  and  Thomas  Fawsyde  to  be  on  ye  cownsaii.'^ 
deane  of  gildis  cosall  and  to  covein  w*  him  according  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie 
wnto  ye  nixt  electioun  of  ye  said  deane  of  gild. 


10 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1607 


The  dekin 
convenar 
nominal  his 
counsaU. 


Rob'  Watsoun 
dekin  of  ye 
flescho's 
promise  of  xij 
lib.  monev. 


Dekin  of  ye 
baxteris 
promise  anent 
ye  contri- 
bu'un  to  ye 
buylding  of  ye 
craftis 
hospitall. 

Certane 
nominal  on 
ye  dekin 
convenar  his 
counsall  taik 
yair  oiEces  in 
and  wpone 
yame. 


Quinto  die  mesis  Novembris  1607. 

Quhilk  daye  Niniane  Andersone  dekin  covenar  hes  noiat  his  cosall  to 
wit  ye  dekinis  of  ye  haill  craftis  of  yis  bur'  and  citie  togidder  w'  Robert  Rowat 
Jo°  Andersone  Diicae  Sempill  Jo°  M^  skipper  James  Fischer  Valter  Douglas 
and  Jo"  Nesmy'  and  hes  ordenit  ye  ofificiar  to  warne  yae  all  to  be  in  ye  New- 
Kirk  ye  nixt  Wedinsdaye  at  aucht  houris  befoLr  nwi  to  tak  y  offices  in  and 
wpone  yame. 

Duodecimo  Novehris  1607. 

Quhilk  daye  Rob'  \\'atsoun  dekin  of  ye  flescho^s  promeisis  to  the  buylding 
farder  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  xij  li  q'"of  James  Braidwood  baillie  dekin  covenar 
for  ye  tyme  did  ressave  sevin  li.  Sua  restis  in  ye  said  Rob'  hand  of  ye  said 
xij  ll  no'  dely\'erit  as  zit  fyve  I1  money. 

Quhilk  daye  Thomas  Fawsyd  dekin  of  ye  baxteris  promeisis  to  ye  buylding 
farder  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  ten  mkis  money. 

Quhilk  daye  psonalie  pnt  Rob'  Rowat  Jo"  Andersone  auld  baillies  James 
Ly'bodie  visitor  of  ye  maltme  and  meUme  James  Fischer  Johnne  Stirling 
dekin  of  ye  hemerme  Stevin  Hamiltoun  dekin  of  ye  tailzouris  Gabriel  Listoun 
dekin  of  ye  cordoneris  Alex''  Cauldwell  dekin  of  ye  skynneris  Thomas  Favvsyde 
dekin  of  ye  baxtis  Thomas  Morisou  dekin  of  ye  cowperis  Robert  Watsoun 
dekin  of  ye  fieschouris  Ar<*  Reid  dekin  of  ye  wreytis  Jo"  Stewart  dekin  of  ye 
masonis  and  Johnne  Brounsyd  dekin  of  ye  bonnetmakeris  electit  and  noiat 
be  Niniae  Andersone  dekin  covenar  to  be  on  his  cosall  and  warnit  to  yis  daye 
to  tak  yair  office  in  and  wpone  yae  be  eleua'un  of  everie  ane  of  y  handis 
protestit  y'  yai  suld  do  y  office  to  ye  glorie  of  God  and  to  ye  weale  of  ye  craftis 
of  yis  bur'  and  citie  and  yair  assisteris. 


Dekin  ol  ye 
wreichtis. 


Quhilk  daye  Archibald  Reid  dekin  of  ye  wreichtis  hes  promeisit  to  covein 
his  craft  w'  all  dilegece  and  to  inquire  of  yae  quhat  yai  will  give  farder  to  ye 
buylding  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  and  to  report  y  aser  to  ye  dekin  covenar  and 
his  cosall  betuix  and  ye  nynetein  daye  of  Noveber  instat. 


Dekin  of  ye 
masonis. 


Dekin  of 
chirurgeanis. 


Quhilk  daye  Johnne  Stewart  dekin  of  ye  masonis  hes  promeisit  to  covein 
his  craft  w'  all  diligece  and  to  inquire  of  yae  quhat  yai  will  give  farder  to  ye 
buylding  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  and  to  report  y'  aser  to  ye  dekin  covenar  and 
his  cosall  betuix  and  the  nynetein  daye  of  November  instat. 

The  dekin  convenar  and  his  cosall  ordenis  M'  Rob'  Hamiltoun  dekin  of 
ye  chirurgeanis  to  be  warnit  to  ye  nynetein  daye  of  Noveber  instat  to  see 
quhat  he  and  his  craft  will  give  farder  to  ye  buylding  of  ye  craftis  hospitall. 


i6o7]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  ir 

Qlk  daye  it  is  fund  y'  M''  Rob'  Hamiltoun  dekiii  of  ye  cliirurgeanis  and  M'  Robert 
Johnne  Clerk  dekin  of  ye  vvobsteris  ar  absent  yis  daye  to  tak  yair  office  in  johnne  Clerk. 
and  wpone  yae  and  awa  yai  ar  ordenit  to  be  warnit  to  ye  xix  daye  of  November 
instat  to  tak  ye  samlg  in  and  wpone  yae. 

Decimo  tertio  die  niesis  Novembris  1607. 

Ouhilk  daye  Niniane  Andersone  dekin  covenar  togidder  \v'  his  cosall  to  James 
wit  Rob'  Rowat  Johnne  Andersone  auld  bailhes  and  Johnne  Mwir  skipper  baiUie  dekin 
Jas  Fischer  and  Johnne  Stirhng  dekin  of  ye  hemirme  Gabriel  Listoun  dekin  ye"™^^"'^ 
of  ye  cordoneris  Stevin  Hamiltou  dekin  of  ye  tailzo'"s  Thomas  Fawsyde  dekin  compt  hard. 
of  ye  haxteris  Alex''  Cauldwell  dekin  of  ye  skynneris  Thomas  Morsoii  dekin 
of  ye  cowperis  Jo"  Clerk  dekin  of  ye  wobsteris  Ar<i  Reid  dekin  of  ye  wreichtis 
Jo"  Stewart  dekin  of  ye  masonis  and  Jo"  Brounsyde  dekin  of  ye  bonnetmakeris 
(Rob'  Watson  dekin  of  ye  flescho''3  and  M''  Rob'  Hamiltoun  dekin  of  ye 
chinirgenaris  being  absent)  to  heir  ye  copt  of  ye  intromissioun  of  James 
Braidwood  now  baillie,  dekin  covenar  for  ye  tyme,  w'  ye  new  retail  maid  be 
ye  craftis  to  yair  hospitall  and  of  ye  auld  retail  yof  and  of  sum  persones  weill 
affectionat  to  ye  buylding  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  and  of  ye  intromissioun  also 
wsit  be  James  Ly'bodie  visito''  of  ye  maltme  and  meilme  appointtit  collecto"" 
for  ye  ingatherig  of  y'  quhilk  ye  craftis  offred  to  ye  buylding  farder  of  ye  said 
hospitall  and  yai  bay'  psonalie  pnt  to  give  y  copt  and  ye  said  James  Ly'bodie 
devolvand  his  copt  wpone  ye  said  James  baillie  and  ye  said  baillie  takand  ye 
samig  wpone  him  findis  that  he  is  first  chargit  w'  ye  intromissiou  of  sevin 
scoir  xij  li  .\ij  s.  iiij  d.  quhilk  is  promeisit  be  ye  dekinis  and  visito''  of  ye  said 
maltme  zeirlie  to  ye  poore  of  ye  said  craftis  hospitall  as  j'e  retail  yvpone  in 
y  kist  mair  fullelie  proportis,  nixt  yat  he  is  chargit  w'  ye  auld  retail  of  ye  said 
craftis  hospitall  qlk  extendis  to  xxvj  ll  ten  s.  na  metioun  maid  of  ony  thing 
for  ye  outfield  landis  of  ye  said  hospitall,  and  thridlie  of  ye  offer  maid  be  ye 
said  dekinis  and  visito''  of  ye  maltme  and  meilme  for  ye  buylding  forder  of  ye 
said  craftis  hospitall  as  is  coteint  in  y  buikis  and  of  wtheris  weill  affectiond 
as  of  DGcane  Leiche  and  w^  no'  cotenit  in  ye  said  buikis  quha  gave  aucht  li 
to  y'  effect,  and  fordlie  w'  ye  intromissioun  of  ye  superplus  gottin  fra  ye  Lard 
of  Ernok  mair  nor  payit  M''  Jo"  Hewesone  for  ye  last  Witsondaye  tme  qlk 
extendis  to  xxiij  1  sex  s.  viij  d.,  and  fyftlie  w'  xvj  li  gottin  fra  fywe  burgess 
to  ye  said  craftis  hospitall,  findis  his  haill  charge  to  extend  to  foure  hundrethe 
fourtie  twa  li  thre  s.  iiij  d.  and  thaireftir  heirand  his  discharge  of  y'  qlk  he 
had  debursit  findis  ye  same  to  extend  to  thre  hundrethe  fiftie  thre  li  twa  s. 
and  swa  to  be  restand  on  ye  copteris  heid  foure  scoir  nyne  li  xvj  d.  qlk  James 
Braidwood  baillie  sayis  y'  he  is  au'and  to  M''  Johne  Allason  noter  yair  clerk 
for  his  feye  ten  iiikis  and  yat  he  hes  no'  gottin  in  as  zit  fra  W'  Wilsoun  twetie  li 
of  J'e  fourtie  li  y'  he  promeisit  to  ye  buylding  farder  of  ye  said  hospitall  and 
that  Thomas  Fawsyde  dekin  of  ye  baxteris  is  au'and  of  y'  qlk  he  promeisit 
zeirlie  to  ye  poore  of  ye  said  hospitall  for  a  zeir  ten  mkis   and   mair  of   ye 


12  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1607 

cotributioun  for  ye  buylding  of  ye  said  hospitall  ten  mkis  and  y'  Jo"  Richie 
for  ye  cowperis  is  au*and  foure  li  Williame  Dulop  for  ye  masonis  xl  s.  and  y' 
3'air  wes  in  wmq"  Peter  Lymburner  handis  yat  he  gave  to  Johnne  Hamiltoun 
Lymburneris  steilbonnetmaker  iyve  ti  and  in  his  handis  of  ye  last  Candilmes  quarter 
dett  aliowit.  gg^.jj^,  g  ^^^  jjj  jjjg  handis  of  ye  last  Beltane  quarter  foure  s.  and  in  ye  handis 
of  Jo"  Stirling  dekin  of  \-e  last  lamase  q''ter  xx  s.  and  in  W  Spag  handis 
xxxiij  s.  iiii  d.  and  in  Ninia  Andersone  dekin  of  ye  cordifiis  handis  for  ye  tyme 
of  ye  cotributioun  gevin  to  ye  buylding  farder  of  ye  said  hospitall  twetie 
[merkis]  and  in  David  Scheraris  handis  wngottin  in  as  zit  albeit  it  be  cotenit 
in  y  buik  to  have  bein  ingottin  be  ye  collecto''  forsaid  thre  li  and  in  Rob' 
Watson  hand  wngottin  in  as  zit  fyve  li  and  in  wmq"  Pet  L^Tnburner  hand  of 
ye  said  c6tribu~un  fyfe  ll  and  in  Matthew  Cabroun  handis  wngottin  in  of  ye 
auld  retail  of  ye  said  hospital!  the  sowme  of  aucht  ti  ij  s.  viij  d. 

Sua  of  ye  haill  wngottin  in  \'e  said  not  Jo"  Allansoun  being 
payit  be  ye  said  baillie  extendis  to  four  scoir  aucht  ll  thre  s.  viij  d. 
Swa  be  yis  copt  he  wilbe  onlie  au'and  xvij  s.  viij  d.  and  all  ye  dettis 
y'  is  au*and  to  be  got  tin  in  for  ye  werk  of  buylding  of  ye  said 
hospitall. 

Apiid  Glasgw  septimo  die  inensis  Ja^>  Anno  i6og. 

Grahame  The  01k  Day  James  Braidwod  baillie  Niniane  Andirsoun  deakin  coveiner 

eiectit  clerk,  j^^^ies  Fyscher  visito''  of  maltmen  and  meilmen  Patrik  Maxwell  deakin  of 
tailzo''s  Thomas  Morsoun  deakin  of  cowperis  Gabriell  Listoun  deakin  of 
cordoneris  Jo"  Neper  deakin  of  hemirmen  James  Mayne  deakin  of  wrychtis 
Andro  Bovd  deakin  of  measonis  William  Luive  deakin  of  skinneris  W™  Glen 
deakin  of  baxteris  Jo"  Watsoun  deakin  of  flescho''s  and  Michaell  Spens  deakin 
of  bonnetmakeris  Ar"  Patirsoun  deakin  of  wobsteris  and  M^  Ro'  Hamiltoun 
deakin  of  chirurgenis  hieing  covenit  for  electing  and  cheising  of  ane  clerk  to 
the  deakin  coveiner  for  this  zeir  to  cum  hes  nominat  and  chosin  M^  Alex'' 
Grahame  notar  to  be  clerk  to  the  deakin  coveiner  for  this  zeir  to  cum  and  to 
the  electioun  of  ye  nixt  deakin  coveiner  as  the  sam  sail  occur  quha  hes  acceptit 
the  said  office  in  and  vpone  him  and  hes  gevin  his  athe  of  fidelitie  as  effeiris. 

The  deakin  coveineris  counsall  this  zeir  io  cum. 

P  i-in  The  01k  Day  Ninian  Andirsoun  deakin  coveiner  efter  mature  deliberatioun 

coiiveinaris       Y\^^  anent  his  counsall  for  the  zeir  to  cum  hes  nomat  the  psonis  following 

counsall.  _      .  .  ,        .        . 

togidder  w'  the  deakins  abouewttin  to  be  vpoun  his  counsall  the  said  zeir  viz 
James  Braidwod,  baillie,  Ro'  Rowet  Jo"  Andirsoun  Jhone  Mwr  skipper  James 
Lychtbody  Alex^  Calwall  Thomas  Fawsyd  Duncan  Sempill  Jo"  Rychie  Jo" 
Sterhng  and  Walter  Dowglas  q*  ar  ordanit  to  be  warnit  to  be  pfnt  w'  the 
deakin  covener  vpoun  Waddinsday  nixt  the  xj  of  Ja^  instant  thair  to  give 
thair  aitliis  of  fidelitie  as  vvs  is. 


i6o9]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  13 

The  Qlk  Day  Ninian  Andirsoun  dykin  coveiner  Jo°  Neper  dykin  of  Act  fauo's 
hemmirmen  James  Braidwod  baillie  and  the  said  Ninian  for  thamselfis  and  '^  '  '°'*'^''- 
in  name  and  behalf  of  the  cordoneris  Wilham  Glen  dykin  of  baxteris  William 
Glen  [?  Luive]  dykin  of  skineris  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin  of  cowpis  James 
Fyscher  visito''  of  maltmen  and  mailmen  Patrik  Maxwell  dykin  of  tailzo^'s 
James  Mayne  dykin  of  wrychtis  Andro  Boyd  dykin  of  measonis  Michaell 
Spans  dykin  of  bonetmakeris  Jo"  Watsoun  dykin  of  ffescho's  M'  Ro'  Hamiltoun 
dykin  of  chjTurgeinis  and  Av^  Patirsoun  dykin  of  wobsteris  bieing  covenit 
to  cosult  and  advys  quhow  and  in  q'  maner  ye  fyve  hundry'  pundis  appointit 
to  be  bestowit  vpone  M''  Jo°  Bell  ordiner  minister  of  the  said  bur'  for  his  guid 
and  thankful!  service  done  y'to  in  tyme  past  and  for  ye  guid  expecta'uns  thay 
have  of  his  service  in  tyme  to  cum,  hes  thocht  it  expedient  y'  everie  ane  covein 
y''  craft  betwix  and  Weddinsday  nixt  the  alevint  of  Ja^  w'  tham  to  be  resolvand 
quhidder  thay  will  codiscend  to  gif  the  fyve  hundry*  pundis  or  the  anuall  y^of 
and  to  report  yair  aser  ye  said  day. 

Apud  Glasgw  vndecimo  die  mensis  Ja^>  Anno  1609. 

The  Qlk  Day  the  psonis  abouenamit  electit  to  be  cosallCs  for  this  zeir  Counsaii 
to  cum  to  ye  said  dykin  coveiner  being  warnit  to  gif  thair  athis  of  fidelitie  to  ^"°''"^- 
this  day  and  bieing  covenit  for  that  effect  hes  be  the  extencioun  of  thair  handis 
solemindlie  sworne  to  gif  thair  guid  advys  and  counsaii  sinceirlie  as  God  sail 
gif  thame  grace  for  the  glorie  of  God  weill  of  the  said  craftis  and  comoun  weill 
of  the  said  bur'  and  citie. 

The  Qlk  Day  Ninian  Andirsoun  dykin  coveiner  and  brethering  of  his  Act  fauo's 
counsaii  bieing  covenit  to  rasave  the  craftis  aser  from  ye  dykinis  yi'of  rep"*  ^  m\ms  er. 
anent  M''  Jo"  Bellis  fyve  hundry'  pundis  vt  ui  ado  vij  Jai^'J  copeirit  Jo"  Neper 
dykin  of  hemirmen  and  Patrik  Maxwell  dykin  of  tailzo''s  and  codiscendis  as 
privat  psonis  and  no'  in  name  of  yair  craftis  to  pay  the  anuall  of  the  said  fyve 
hundry'  pundis  pro  rata  as  thair  ptis  be  cotributioun  sail  extend  to.  James 
Braidwod  baillie  and  ye  said  dykin  coveiner  in  name  and  behalf  of  Gabriell 
Lystoun  dykin  of  cordoneris  bieing  absent  codiscendis  to  pay  the  prn"  or 
anuall  of  the  said  fyve  hundry'  pundis  as  ye  rest  of  the  craftis  sail  think 
expedient  to  pay.  William  Glen  dykin  of  baxteris  codiscendis  to  pay  the 
anuall  during  ye  said  M'  Jo°  his  lyftyme.  William  Luive  dykin  of  skineris 
codiscendis  to  gif  the  anual  for  this  pfnt  zeir  vpone  coditioun  y'  ye  geving 
y^of  to  him  astrict  no'  thame  nor  thair  successor's  to  gif  the  sam  to  ye  said 
M'  Jo"  nor  his  successors  vtherway  is  nor  sail  pleas  thame.  Copeirit  James 
Fyscher  visito''  of  maltmen  and  meilmen  accumpaneit  w'  James  Ly'body  and 
Walter  Dowglas  direct  w'  him  fra  him  [?  them]  of  y'  rank  and  declarit  y' 
thai  and  everie  ane  of  thame  wes  willing  to  gif  to  ye  said  M'  Jo"  ye  anual  of 
the  said  fyv<^  ll  for  this  pfnt  zeir  1609  zeiris  only  viz  sa  meakle  as  ye  samein 
sould  extend  to  for  thair  p'  haill  and  togidder  or  at  twa  termes  as  ye  rest  of  the 


14  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1609 

craftis  sould  think  expedient  provyding  y*  the  geving  y^of  astrictit  no'  tham 
nor  thair  successo''s  in  payment  of  the  same  ather  pr^'  or  anuall  to  ye  said 
M''  Jo°  himself  or  his  successor's  vtherwayis  nor  it  pleasit  thame  and  yair 
foirsaidis  to  think  guid  nor  zit  y'  the  said  M''  Jo°  and  his  foirsaidis  sould  have 
power  to  exact  the  sam  of  tham  vtherwayis  nor  as  said  is.  Thomas  Morsoun 
dykin  of  cowpis  agreis  in  maner  as  said  is  be  ye  said  James  Fyscher,  John 
Watsoun  dykin  of  flescho^s  coform  for  ane  zeir.  Michaell  Spens  dykin  of 
bonnetmakeris  according  to  thair  number  and  power  hes  codiscendit  to  pay 
the  anuall  for  ane  zeir.  M''  Ro'  Hamiltoun  dykin  of  chjTurgenis  hes  codiscendit 
coform.  James  Mayne  dykin  of  wrychtis  refusit  to  gif  ather  pr^'  or  anuall 
in  ony  sort  and  Andro  Boyd  dykin  of  measonis  in  lyk  maner. 

ActWUsoun.  The  Qlk  Day  Dauid  Wilsouns  supplica'un  bieing  hard  and  cosiderit  anent 

his  recopens  to  be  maid  to  him  for  his  panis  and  travellis  tain  in  the  craftis 
effaris  and  vnderstanding  yt  the  said  Dauid  his  travellis  wes  chargable  to  him 
thairfoir  the  haill  dykins  in  ane  voyce  hes  ordanit  him  to  be  satisfeit  and 
payit  at  the  discretioun  of  James  Braidwod  baillie  and  Ninian  Andirsoun 
dykin  coveiner  for  the  qlk  the  pfnt  act  sail  be  thair  warrand  reportand  his 
discharge. 

Apttd  Glasgw  decimo  quinto  die  mensis  Feb^>  Anno  Domini  1609. 

Act  anent  the  The  Qlk  Day  Ninian  Andirsoun  dykin  coveiner  James  Braidwod,  baillie, 

actfo°n?s.'°™'  Jo°  Andirsoun  Jo"  Mwr  James  Lychtbody  Walter  Dowglas  Alex--  Calwall 
Jo°  Sterling  and  Thomas  Fawsyd  breithering  of  his  counsall  togidder  w*  the 
haill  dykins  of  craftis  being  covenit  to  cosult  and  advys  quhow  and  in  q*  maner 
ye  actionis  of  new  intentit  be  S''  George  Elphinstoun  of  Blythiswod  kny' 
cotrar  this  burghe  liberteis  y'of  and  comoun  weUl  of  the  sam  may  be  defendit, 
as  also  j'e  actionis  to  be  intendit  be  ye  said  burghe  aganst  him  may  be  psewit 
and  ye  expess  of  baythe  susteanit,  and  vnderstanding  that  ye  said  S''  George 
hes  intentit  ye  same  vpone  na  guid  grund  nor  rasoun  bot  vpone  mear  malice 
coceavit  and  cotractit  in  his  hart  aganst  the  said  bur'  and  comoun  weill  y'of 
and  y'  nocht  only  at  his  awn  instace  and  vther  his  associatis  cotenit  in  his 
former  psuits  bot  also  at  ye  instance  of  sindrie  vtheris  of  guid  qualitie  quhome 
he  hes  movit  to  gif  thair  names  yJ'to  thairby  doing  qt  in  him  lyis  to  impair 
the  liberteis  of  the  said  bur'  and  to  hurt  the  comoun  guid  of  the  samyn  as 
also  to  draw  the  said  burghe  in  heiche  misso^  of  dett  no^  now  it  is  into  cotractit 
be  him  qi'  as  he  bwir  office  throw  his  preposterous  deiling  as  lykwayis  to  mak 
the  sam  the  mair  onable  to  do  the  cdmoun  effairis  y'of,  hes  tho'  it  expedient 
y'  thair  be  ane  cotributioun  collectit  monethlie  amangst  the  friemen  of  the 
said  craftis  thairw'  and  for  thair  ptis  to  sustean  the  expess  of  the  saidis 
actionis,  and  for  y'  effect  hes  ordanit  y'  everie  dykin  covein  thair  craftis  rasave 
thair  aser  anent  the  same  and  report  vpone  Fryday  at  twa  efternwn  that 
tbairefi  ane  solid  ordo^  may  be  tain  and  sett  doun  yairanent. 


i6o9]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  15 

A-pud  Glasgw  decimo  septimo  die  mensis  Februarij  Anno  1609. 

The  Oik   Day  Ninian  Andirsoun  dykin  coveiner  and  breithering  of  his  Act  anent  the 
counsall  hieing  covenit  to  heir  the  craftis  aser  reportit  be  the  dykins  anent  uiay'^saifbe' 
ye  maner  and  way  quhovv  the  saidis  actionis  intentit  be  S""  George  may  be  persewit  [and] 

J    r      J-  1  i  o  ->  defendit. 

detendit  as  also  the  touns  actiouns  aganst  mm  psewit  and  the  expess  of 
baythe  susteanit,  quha  declaris  that  the  saidis  craftis  vnderstanding  y'  the 
said  S^  George  meanig  is  nathing  ellis  bot  ye  hurt  of  the  comoun  weill  of  the 
said  bur'  and  imparing  of  ye  libertie  y^of  hes  all  in  ane  voce  codiscendit  and 
agreit  y'  everie  frieman  of  craft  w'in  the  same  sail  gif  oulklie  viij  d.  so  lang  as 
ye  saidis  actionis  sail  be  in  proces  and  psewit  and  y'  als  weill  for  defending 
as  psewing  the  sam  and  the  sam  to  be  collectit  monethlie  or  oulklie  be  ye 
dykin  of  the  craft  and  quhow  swin  as  ye  saidis  actionis  ar  endit  the  supplus 
gif  ony  sail  happin  to  be,  to  be  imployit  and  applyit  to  sum  comoun  and  guid 
vse  for  the  weill  of  the  craftis  and  becaus  y'  nether  the  said  cotributioun  may 
be  sett  doun  in  pticular  nor  zit  in  dew  tyme  collectit  for  supplie  of  the  pfnt 
necessatie  in  respect  yt  thair  man  sum  be  directit  to  Ed'  and  be  thair  ye  xx 
of  this  instant  hieing  the  touns  dyet  and  day  of  copeirance  in  defence  of  the 
toun  aganst  the  said  S'  George  hes  thocht  guid  for  the  pfnt  to  borrow  fra 
James  Fyscher  visitor  the  soum  of  fortie  ll  vpone  band  and  securitie  to  be 
gevin  to  him  be  James  Braidwod  baillie  and  Ninian  Andirsoun  dykin  coveiner 
for  repaying  y^of  to  him  again  vpone  the  xxv  day  of  the  said  monethe  of  FC 
vpone  securitie  to  be  maid  to  tham  of  the  haill  dykins  for  thair  relief  of  the 
said  soum  at  the  hands  of  the  said  James  Fyscher. 

Apud  Glasgw  vigesinio  c^to  die  mensis  Februarij  Anno  Domini  1609. 

The  Qlk  Day  Ninian  Andiisoun  dykin  coveiner  and  dykins  of  craftis  Act  anent  ye 
bieing  covenit  to  tak  farder  ordo'  anet  the  viij  d.  oulklie  cotributioune  as  biitioun°and' 
also  to  tak  ordo""  anent  the  fortie  ll  borrowit   fra  James   Fyscher   in  respect  Fys^beris 
y*  as  zit  the  said  cotributioun  is  no*  collectit  the  said  James  of  his  awn  cosent 
hes  continewit  the  payment  y''of  to  Waddinday  nixt  but  prejudice  alway  of 
his  band  and  penaltis  y'in  cotenit  at  qlk  tyme  the  saidis  dykins  sail  giv  thair 
pfyt  aser  anent  the  said  cotributioun  quha  sail  bietuix  and  ye  said  day  collect 
the  same  for  ane  monethe  to  effect  y'  thairw'  and  of  the  first  and  reddiest  of 
the  same  the  said  James  may  be  payit  of  his  fortie  ll  and  the  said  dykin 
coveiner  and  baillie  releilit  of  thair  band  gevin  to  him  of  the  same. 

Apud  Glasgw  primo  die  mensis  Martij  Anno  1609. 

The  Qlk  Day  James  Braidwod  baillie  Ninian  Andirsoun  dykin  coveiner  Fyscheds 
and  remanent  dykins  bieing  covenit  to  ye  effect  y'  payment  may  be  maid  l^a'^it.''''' 
to  James  Fyscher  of  the  fortie  ll  borrowit  fra  him  be  ye  said  baillie  and  dykin 
in  name  of  the  craftis  thairw'  to  sustain  y''  p*  of  the  chargis  imployit  in  defence 
of  the  actioun  intendit  be  S"'  George  Elphinstoun  aganis  the  toun,  the  said 


i6 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1609 


Act  anent 
Ixxx  lib. 


Act  dykin 

conveineris 

compt. 


James  be  the  tennC  of  this  pint  act  gratis  him  to  have  rasavit  fra  the  said 
baillie  dykin  coveiner  and  craftis  the  said  soum  of  fortie  ll  and  be  thir  pfntis 
dischargis  thame  and  y""  successor's  thairof  for  ever  and  grantis  the  band  maid 
to  him  y^vpone  be  the  said  bailhe  and  dykin  fultilHt  in  all  p's  and  y'^oi 
exoers  and  dischargis  thame  thair  airis  exeo^^  and  assignayis  for  ever. 

The  Qlk  Day  vnderstanding  that  as  zit  thair  restis  in  James  Braidwod 
bailleis  handis  the  soum  of  Ixxxix  l3  xvj  d.  money  of  the  cotributioun  and 
vtheris  dewteis  pteanig  to  ye  craftis  and  hospitall  y^of  and  as  zit  in  certen 
psonis  handis  cotenit  in  ane  act  sett  doun  ye  xiij  of  November  1607  zeiris 
as  also  vnderstanding  yt  the  said  James  Braidwod  hes  ane  compt  of  certen 
soums  of  money  debursit  be  him  as  zit  onhard  allowit  or  payit  be  the  craftis 
to  him  hes  thoght  it  expedient  that  ordo'  be  tain  yi'wt  and  to  y'  effect  appointis 
the  acht  of  Marche  instant  to  heir  the  said  compt  and  to  tak  ordof  anet  the 
said  soum  restand  in  his  handis. 

The  Qlk  Day  the  haill  dykinis  hieing  covenit  to  heir  Ninian  Andirsoun 
dykin  coveineris  compt  of  his  charge  and  discharg  of  the  dewtie  perteaning  to 
the  craftis  hospitall  intromettit  w'  be  him  as  collector  of  the  rentell  dewtie 
y^of  and  vther  anual  rentis  belanging  y^to  fra  his  entrie  in  office  qlk  wes  at 
ye  Michaelmes  1607  zeiris  to  Michaelmes  1608  zeiris  q^oi  the  pticular  compt 
followis. 

The  coumpter  his  charge. 

In  the  first  ye  compter  chargis  him  of  borrowit  syluer  fra  M^  Dauid  Gibsoun 
coform  to  ane  warrand  q'of  the  said  compter  standis  as  zit  onreleivit  the 
soum  of  ....  .  i<=xxxiij  ll  vi  s.  viij  d. 

Item  rasavit  fra  the  Laird  Ernok  as  for  the  Witsounday  and  Martimes  termes 
anuall  1607  zeiris  and  ye  Witsounday  term  last  bypast  1608  zeiris    i<=xx  ll 

Item  fra  the  Laird  Lekprevek  for  ye  Witsounday  and  Martimes  termes  anual 
1607  zeiris       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  ll 

Item  fra  Christen  Broun  relict  of  vmqi'  James  Clerk  iiichand  left  be  him  in 
legacie  to  ye  pwir  of  the  hospitall        .  .  .  .  iij  ll 

Item  be  Jo°  Moriesoun  ihchand      .  .  .  .  x  s. 

Item  the  craftis  qrter  comptis  ye  said  zeir  extending  to  jcHj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Suiha  totalis  extendis  to  .  .  .         iiij^xlix  li  x  s. 

The  Coumpteris  Discharge. 

In  ye  first  gevin  to  ane  boy  to  ga  to  Ernok  for  the  craving  of  his  aiiuall  vj  s. 

Item  for  James  Braidwodis  hors  hyr  and  the  compteris  q°  thay  raid  to 
Hamiltoun  to  speik  Ernok  anent  the  anual     .  .  .  xxx  s. 

Item  to  Jo°  Steuart  measoun  borrowit  fra  him  be  James  Braidwod 

iij  "Xvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  to  M^  Jo°  Houisoun  for  the  Martimes  term  1607  zeiris    Ivj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 


i6o9]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  17 

Gevin  to  Jo"  Stewart  for  leris  rasit  aganst  James  Braidwod  .        xlviij  s. 

Item  to  George  Easdaill  for  his  work  at  ye  hospitall  Ixiij  li  viij  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  Jo°  Allan  kairter  for  leiding  of  the  sklaitis  fra  ye  Brwmilaw     xliiij  s. 
Item  to  ane  smythe  for  ane  lok  and  kie  to  ye  almowshous  dwr  xxiiij  s. 

Item  gevin  for  the  lean  of  fortie  li  borrowit  to  gif  M'  Jo"  Howisoun  in  respect 

Ernokis  syluer  wer  no*  gottin  in  tyme  .  .  xxvj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  ane  pwir  man  y'  come  owt  of  Dundie  at  comand  of  ye  dykins  xl  s. 

Item  to  M''  Jo"  Houisoun  for  ye  Martimes  term  1607  zeiris  of  his  twa  hundry' 

mks  last  dotit  to  ye  hospitall  .  .  .     vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  nailis  to  ane  man  of  Bonnokburn  .  .  .  viij  ll 

Item  mair  for  nailis  to  ane  vther  man  of  Bonokbwm         .  vj  li  vj  s. 

Item  to  Ro*  Brok  for  charging  of  Schawtoun  for  paying  his  anual  rent  of  the 

hundrythe  mkis  .  .  .  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Item  to  Ar<i  Brewhous  for  great  nailis        .  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Item  to  ane  man  of  Bonnokburn  for  iij*^  fluring  naillis       .  .  xx  s. 

Item  to  Jo"  Allan  for  leiding  of  the  lathe  fra  ye  new  wynd  to  ye  hospitall     vj  s. 
Item  to  Georg  Easdaills  men  for  fog  .  .  .     iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  for  leiding  of  the  sparris  and  half  ruid  of  lofting  fra  ye  brig  vj  s. 

Item  for  the  half  ruid  of  lofting  gottin  fra  Martein  M'Lintoche      .  vj  li 

Item  for  the  sawing  of  the  sparris  .  .  .  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  Ro*  Pettigrew  of  drink  syluer        ...  iij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  Ro'  Brewhous  for  vther  great  garroun  naillis         .  .  xx  s. 

Item  to  Ro'  Pettigrew  and  James  Reed  for  thair  thrie  dayis  work  ilk  ane  of 

thame  in  pwtting  wp  of  the  sparris     ....  iiij  li 

Item  to  Simon  Baird  officier  for  two  pair  of  schone  .  .       xxxvj  s. 

Item  to  Gavin  Allan  for  fluring  naillis        ....  xxv  s. 

Item  to  M^  Jo"  Housoun  for  the  Witsounday  termes  anuall  1608 

Ixiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  to  ye  wrychtis  for  aill  q"  thay  began  to  lay  the  hospitall  work  v  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  for  the  wyne  to  M''  Jo"  Houisouns  wyf  q"  scho  rasavit  ye  anuall  xvj  s. 
Item  for  ye  wrychtis  disjone  y'  wrocht  ye  hospitalls  work  gratis  .  xvj  s. 
Item  for  two  qrtis  aill  q"  thay  had  endit  ye  work  .  v  s.  iiij  d. 

Mair  for  thrie  hundrythe  fluring  nailis  w'  half  ane  hundry'  the  small  nailis 

xxxiiij  s. 
Mair  for  naillis  to  ane  man  of  Bonnokbwrn  .  .  iij  li  iiij  s. 

Item  to  Jo"  Hamiltoun  smythe  to  help  to  by  him  clathis  .  vj  li 

Ite  for  leidding  of  sklaitis  again  to  ye  hospitall      .  .  .  xx  s. 

Item  to  Dauid  Neill  for  attending  on  ye  way  taking  of  the  gravell     xvj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  mair  for  ane  qrt  of  aill  to   George  Easdails  men  q"  thay  war  at  yair 

work  ........        xxxij  d. 

Item  to  ye  kairteris  for  leidding  of  the  flag  stanis  to  ye  sink      xxxvj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  to  the  quario^'s  for  the  stanis  .  .  .  .  xx  s. 

Item  gevin  to  ye  thrie  pwir  men  in  ye  hospitall       .  .  .  Ix  li 


i8  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1609 

Item  to  M'  Dauid  Gibsoun  for  his  anuall  the  Martimes  term  1607  and  Wit- 
sounday  1608  zeiris     ......  xviij  li 

Item  mair  to  M'  Dauid  Gibsoun  for  his  anuall  ye  Martimes  1608  and  Wit- 
sounday  term  1609  zeiris         .....         .xviij  ll 

Item  to  Thomas  Morsoun  for  twa  jeistis  to  be  sparris        .  .  vj  li 

Item  to  Mr  Ro*  AUassoun  for  ye  buik        .  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Item  to  M''  Alex''  Grahame  for  wrytting    .  .  .  .  xl  s. 

SuiTia  of  the  haiU  extendis  to  .  iiij'^xxxvj  l!  xvij  s. 

Sua  restis  on  ye  compteris  heid  .  .  xij  ll  xiij  s. 

Compthard.  Qlk  compt  hieing  hard  of  the  compteris  charge  and  discharge  fra    the 

Michaelmes  1607  to  Michaelmes  1608  zeiris  except  ye  fy\'e  ihkis  of  the  burgess 
y*  zeir  and  the  dewtie  of  the  auld  renteU  coUectit  be  Mathow  Calmeroun  the 
saidis  dykins  auditor's  of  his  compt  hes  allowit  ye  sam  to  him  in  onibus  and 

Compt  aliowit.  be  compt  and  rekonlg  it  is  fund  y*  the  said  Ninian  restis  achten  the  soum  of 
.xij  li  xiij  s.  qlk  the  said  Ninian  dely\'erit  presentlie  to  \A^illiam  NeUsoun 
collecto''. 

Mdum  that  ye  anuall  of  the  ij*^  mkis  inawand  be  ye  saidis  craftis  to  ye 
said  Ninian  and  be  him  to  M'  Dauid  Gibsoun  is  payit  to  the  terme  of  Martimes 
1609. 

Penultimo  Aprilis  1609. 

Bell  Mi'  The  Qlk  Day  Ninian  Andersoun  dykin  coveiner  and  breithering  of  his 

annueirent.  counsaU  [being  convened]  to  cosult  and  deliberat  farder  anent  ye  annual  rent 
of  the  fyve  hundry*  pundis  appointit  to  be  gevin  to  M^  Jo"  Bell  and  to  ilk  dykin 
to  declair  quhow  meakU  thay  will  gif  of  the  same  p  rata  copeirit  Jo°  Nep  and 
codiscendis  to  gif  v  li  for  the  hemmirmen  James  Fyscher  for  maltmen  and 
meillmen  viij  ll  Patrik  Maxwell  dykin  of  tailzo's  vj  ll  Gabriell  Listoun 
dykin  of  cordoneris  vj  ll  W™  Glen  dykin  of  baxteris  iij  li  WiUiam  Luive 
iiij  ll  Ar<i  Patirsoun  dykin  of  wobsteris  iij  ll  vj  s.  vaij  d.  James  Mayne 
dykin  of  wrychtis  xl  s.  John  Watsoun  dykin  of  flescho^'s  iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Michell  Spens  dykin  of  bonnetmakeris  xxvj  s.  viij  d.  Andro  Boyd  dykin  of 
measonis  x.xx  s.  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin  of  cowperis  iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d.  M"'  Ro* 
Hamiltoun  xxvj  s.  viij  d. 

Tertio  die  mensis  Maif  1609. 

Neiisoun  m'  The  Qlk  Day  Ninian  Andersoun  dykin  coveiner  and  remanent  dykins 

"'°'^  ■  togidder  w*  Robert  Rowet  Jo°  Andirsoun  James  Lychtbody  W™  Neiisoun 

Jo°  Sterling  and  James  Braidwod  baillie  breithering  of  his  counsall  hieing 
covenit  to  tak  ordo^  anent  the  farder  building  of  the  hospitall  and  vnder- 
standing  y*  it  is  verie  expedient  that  thair  be  sum  honest  man  selectit  to  attend 
the  sam  hes  to  yt  effect  nominat  W""  Neiisoun  elder  quha  at  the  eirnist  requeist 


i609]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  19 

and  des}T  of  the  said  dykin  coveiner  and  vtheris  abouenamit  hes  acceptit  vpone 
him  to  be  m''  of  work  of  and  oursieer  of  the  rest  of  the  work  of  the  almoushous 
as  zit  onpfyttit  for  this  prnt  zeir. 

Lykas  the  said  dykin  coveiner  hes  acceptit  vpone  him  to  resave  and 
intromett  w'  the  qrter  comptis  of  this  zeii  1609  zeiris  to  delyver  the  said  m"' 
of  work  for  ye  effect  foirsaid. 

Die  decimo  nono  mensis  Maij  1609. 

The  Qlk  Day  Ninian  Andirsoun  dykin  conveiner  James  Braidwod  bailHe  Act  anent 
and  breithering  of  craftis  dykinis  y''of  abouenamit  bieing  covenit  to  tak  ordo'' 
wt  sindrie  effairis  of  ye  craftis  and  hospitall  y^'of  specialHe  anent  the  four  scoir 
nyn  li  xv  d.  restan  in  the  said  James  Braidwodis  handis  cotenit  in  ane  act  sett 
doun  y^'anent  ye  xiij  of  Nouember  1607  at  leist  restan  in  sindrie  handis  as  zit 
onexactit  or  collectit  be  him  as  dykin  coveiner  y*  zeir  hes  ordanit  the  said 
James  Braidwod  bailHe  to  exact  the  sam  as  the  pticulars  beiris  and  y'  frome 
the  psonis  cotenit  in  the  said  act  and  y'  bietuix  and  ye  xx  day  of  Junij  nixt. 

The  Qlk  Day  Ninian  Andirsoun  dykin  coveiner  James  Braidwod  bailUe  Act  anent  the 
and  remanent  dykinis  vnderstanding  that  be  the  neghgence  of  bypast  tymes  dykin°  ^^ 
and  great  aursycht  of  the  dykins  coveineris  the  dewtie  of  the  craftis  hospitall  co«veineris 
and  vther  dewteis  bielanging  y''to  sik  as  ye  bur'  fyve  merkis  the  new  foundit  making. 
rentell  the  qrter  compt  and  vther  casualiteis  incident  y^to  as  guid  and  charitable 
psonis  ar  movit  to  bestaw  vpone  the  pwir  y'  hes  remanit  a  lang  space  in  thair 
handis  but  compt  rekonig  or  payment  and  ane  great  p'  of  the  sam  oncollectit 
be  tham  fra  the  dykins  and  vtheris  inawand  the  sam  to  ye  great  hurt  of  the 
craftis  weill  y'of  and  to  ye  prejudice  of  the  pwir  of  the  hospitall  and  hindir 
of  the  flurisching  of  the  sam,  for  remeid  c^oi  and  yt  the  same  may  in  all  tyme 
cuing  be  preventit  it  is  cocludit  and  agreit  vpone  y'  everie  dykin  coveiner  at 
ye  dimissioun  of  his  office  or  at  the  maist  w'in  xv  dayis  y^'efter  sail  mak  copt 
and  rekonig  of  his  charge  and  discharge  and  pay  qtsuever  soums  sail  be  fund 
restan  in  his  handis  q^of  he  hes  tain  intromissioun  and  of  all  vther  dewteis 
copetent  to  him  to  intromet  w',  the  qlk  it  sail  have  hapinit  him  no'  to  have 
rasavit  fra  the  aweris  of  the  sam. 

Septimo  die  mensis  Junij;  Anno  1609. 
The  Qlk  Day  Ninian  Andirsoun  dykin  coveiner  bieing  covenit  to  resave  Bell  ministeris 
fra  ye  craftis  dykins  y''of  the  fyftie  pund  appointit  to  be  collectit  and  gevin  '  ^^' 
to  M''  Jo°  Bell  as  for  ane  zeiris  anuall  of  the  fyve  hundryt  pund  appointit  and 
comonit  vpone  to  have  bein  gevin  to  M'  Jo°  Bell  minister,  copeirit  James 
Fyscher  visito''  of   maltmen  and   meilmen   and  delyverit  to   ye   said    Ninia 
viij  ll  money  Thomas  Morsoun  fyve  merkis  Michaell    Spans  xxvj  s.  viij  d. 
All  Patirsoun  fyve  merkis  W™  Luif  fo'  ll  Patrik  Maxwell  vj  ll  Gabriell  Listoun 
vj  ll  W"  Glen  iij  ll  James  Mayne  xl  s.  Jo°  Watsoun  fyve  merkis. 


20 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1609 


Mwr  xl  s. 


Act  anent  the 
parliament. 


The  craftis 
taxit. 


Lyttis  for  ye 
dykin 
conveiner 
presentit. 


Dykin 

conveineris 
counsall. 


The  sam  day  copeirit  Jo"  Mwr  skipper  and  delyverit  to  \V™  Neilsoun 
pint  collector  the  soum  of  xl  s.  to  be  imployit  to  ye  farder  building  of  the 
craftis  hospitall  qlk  xl  s.  is  a  p'  of  ye  money  offirt  to  ye  pwir  in  his  schip. 

Decimo  tertio  die  niensis  Junij  Anno  i6og. 

The  Qlk  Day  Ninian  Andirsoun  dykin  coveiner  James  Braidvvod  baillie 
and  haill  dykins  of  craftis  except  ye  smythis  and  chyrurgeins  hieing  coveinit 
and  vnderstanding  yt  my  Lord  of  Glasgw  be  his  letter  hes  requeistit  ye  toun 
to  send  sum  of  the  said  bur*  to  Ed""  thair  to  attend  vpone  him  ye  tyme  of  the 
pliament  and  vnderstanding  y'  the  provest  bailleis  and  counsall  hes  concludit 
to  send  twelt  psonis  to  Ed^"  for  y*  effect,  sex  of  the  rank  of  mchands  and  vther 
sex  of  the  rank  of  craftis,  hes  yi'foir  thocht  it  expedient  to  furneis  owt  ye  said 
niiber  vpone  the  craftis  expess  viz  Ninian  Andirsoun  Duncan  Sempill  James 
Fyscher  Patrik  Maxwell  Thomas  Morsoun  Gabriell  Listoun  to  quhome  yair 
is  ordanit  to  be  gevin  to  ilk  psoun  ten  I1  money  to  be  y""  expess  to  be  cotributit 
amangst  ye  craftis  fro  rata  according  to  y''  burding  and  power. 

Sexto  Septembris  Anno  i6og. 

The  Qlk  Day  Ninian  Andirsoun  dykin  coveiner  and  remanet  dykins  bieing 
covenit  to  taxt  />  rata  the  craftis  for  payment  to  be  maid  to  the  sex  psonis  q* 
raid  to  attend  the  bischop  at  pliament  hes  sett  doun  the  sam  to  be  exactit  of 
the  pticular  craftis  following  viz  wry's  fyftie  s.  skineris  iiij  li  wobsteris  iiij  I1 
baxteris  xl  s.  smeithis  iij  li  flescho''s  1  s.  and  bonnetmakeris  fortie  s.  and 
measoins  xl  s. 

Decimo  Octobris  i6og. 

The  Qlk  Day  James  Braidwod  baillie  in  place  of  Ninian  Andsoun  dykin 
coveiner  bieing  absent  the  dekins  of  craftis  and  vtheris  of  the  rank  of  craftis 
bieing  covenit  to  chuis  out  twa  psonis  togidder  w'  Ninian  Andirsoun  dykin 
to  be  on  lyts  and  pfntit  befoir  the  pvest  bailleis  and  counsall  y'  ane  of  tham 
may  be  electit  dykin  coveiner  for  this  zeir  to  cum  coform  to  ye  ler  of  gildrie, 
hes  be  pluralitie  of  voits  electit  and  chosin  Thomas  Morsoun  and  Thomas 
Fausyd  togidder  w'  ye  said  Ninian  to  be  vpone  lyt  to  the  effect  foirsaid. 

Vigesimo  prima  die  mensis  Octobris  Anno  1609. 

The  Qlk  Day  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin  coveiner  efter  matuir  deliberatioun 
had  anent  ye  electioun  of  his  cosall  for  ye  zeir  to  cum  hes  nominat  ye  psonis 
following  to  be  on  his  counsall  for  the  said  zeir  togidder  w'  the  dykins  of  craftis 
viz  James  Braidwod,  baillie,  Ro'  Rowet  Johne  Andirsoun  Ninian  Andirsoun 
Jo°  MwT  skipper  James  Ly'body  Thomas  Fawsyd  Patrik  Maxwell  Duncan 
Sempill  Jo°  Rychie  Jo"  Stirling  Walter  Dowglas  quha  ar  ordanit  to  be  warnit 
to  be  pfnt  in  the  New  Kirk  vpone  Waddinsday  the  first  of  Nouember  nixt  y'' 
to  giv  thair  athe  of  fidelitie  as  vse  is. 


i609]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  21 

The  Qlk  Day  the  said  dykin  coveiner  and  remanent  dykins  hes  electit  Clerk  electit. 
of  new  M'  Alex^  Grahame  to  be  clerk  to  ye  said  dykin  coveiner  quha  hes  gevin 
his  athe  as  vse  is  and  y'  for  this  zeir  to  cum. 

The  Qlk  Day  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin  coveiner  dykins  of    craftis  and  Dean  of 
remanent  ye  dekine  coveineris  counsallofs  hieing  covenit  to  chuis  fo"'  psonis  fo„,',sau 
of  the  rank  of  craftis  to  be  vpone  the  dean  of  gildis  counsall  for  this  zeir  to  ^hosin. 
cum  coform  to  ye  ler  of  gildrie  sett  doun  y^anent  hes  electit  and  chosin  Jo" 
Andirsoun  Ninian  Andirsoun  James  F^'scher  and  Alex"'  Calwall  to  be  vpone 
the  said  dean  of  gildis  counsall  for  this  zeir  to  cum  coform  to  ye  said  ler  of 
gildrie. 

Prima  Nouembris  1609. 

The   Qlk   Day   Thomas   Morsoun   dykin   coveiner   and  remanent   dykins  The  puir  men 
togidder  \v'  James  Braidwod,  baillie,  Jo"  Andirsoun  Ninian  Andirsoun  James  h"s^^eitteii 
Ly'body  Thomas  Fawsyd  and  Jhone  Stirling  bieing  covenit  and  vnderstanding  "'^"'  o^eice. 
y'  now  ye  hospitall    is  in  sum  guid  messo''  pfyttit  swa  y*  the  same  is  maid 
sufficient  for  ye  pwir  y''of  y''in  to  remain  and  mak  y"'  dwelling  hous  coform 
to  ye  ordinance  prescryvit  and  sett  doun  y^'anent  hes  y'foir  thocht  it  expedient 
that  the  said  pwir  presentlie  intertineit  be  the  craftis  as  dekayit    breither 
addres  yamselfis  to  ye  said  hospitall  and  y^'in  mak  y''  recidence  coforme  to  ye 
ordo""  prescryvit  to  thame  and  that  imediatlie  eftir  the  dat  heirof  and  intima^un 
maid  to  yam  for  y'  effect,  secundlie  that  thay  presyslie  observe  and  keip  the 
sabothe  dayis  evie  preiching  on  the  oulk  dayis  and  daylie  prayeris  vsit  in  ye 
Hie  Kirk,  thirdlie  y'  thay  meit  everie  buriell  neir  to  ye  wynheid  ane  alwayis 
waytane  on  ye  ringing  of  y^  bell  and  y'  thay  be  fund  at  na  tyme  begand  w'out 
ye  hospitall  dyk  and  y*  na  almous  be  socht  be  thame  bot  be  the  ringing  of  the 
bell. 

Apiid  Glasgw  octauo  die  mensis  Decebris  Anno  Domini  i6og. 

The  Qlk  Day  James  Braidwod  baillie  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin  coveiner  James 
Jo"  Neper  dykin  of  smy*s  James  Fyscher  visito"^  Gabriell  Listoun  dykin  of  bircompt. 
cordoneris  Thomas  Wylie  dykin  of  tailzo^s  Alex''  Calwall  dykin  of  skinneris 
Rychard  Kirkland  dykin  of  wobsteris  Jo"  Watsoun  dykin  of  flescho^'s  Jhone 
Boyd  dykin  of  measouns  and  Rychard  Spens  dykin  of  bonnetmakeris  Ninian 
Andirsoun  Thomas  Fausyd  and  v's  the  said  dykin  coveineris  counsallCs 
bieing  coveinit  for  sindrie  effairis  twitching  the  craftis  y''  hospitall  and  dewteis 
belanging  y^'to  speciallie  anent  the  pticular  soums  of  money  inawand  to  the 
hospitall  contenit  in  ane  act  sett  doun  in  Noueber  1607  zeiris  q^of  James 
Braidwod  yan  dykin  coveiner  sould  mak  compt  as  he  quha  wes  collecto''  of 
ye  dewteis  pteanig  to  the  said  hospitall  the  said  zeir  qlk  bieing  cosidderit  y'' 
is  fund  to  be  as  zit  restan  achten  y^of  the  soume  of  fortie  vij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 
money  qlk  soum  the  said  James  hes  acceptit  vpone  him  and  to  collect  and 


22  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1609 

ingadder  the  same  and  to  delyver  the  said  soum  to  Thomas  Morsoun  now  dykin 
coveiner  discharging  the  said  James  of  the  rest  of  y'  compt  the  said  zeir  as  ye 
pticulars  y''of  beiris  except  the  soum  of  xx  mlcs  inawand  be  ye  baxteris  for 
the  qlk  the  said  dykin  coveiner  hes  rasavit  fra  Thomas  Fawsyd  ane  rolm' 
cotenig  vj  li  vj  s.  viij  d.  y^of  and  ye  names  of  the  baxteris  quha  ar  astrictit 
in  paymet  of  vij  li  y^oi  quha  is  ordanit  to  take  ordo^  y^an'  as  apteanithe. 

And  syklyk  having  hard  Mathow  Calmerouns  compt  as  collecto"'  of  the 
auld  rentells  dewties  the  zeiris  of  God  1607  and  1608  zeiris  iindis  the  said  Mathow 
to  be  restan  achten  the  said  zeiris  the  soum  of  xij  li  viij  s.  money  q^oi  tlie 
saidis  auditors  dischargis  to  the  said  Mathow  for  his  panis  ye  soum  of  fo'' 
ll  xij  s.  and  ordanis  him  to  delyver  to  ye  said  dykin  coveiner  the  soum  of  viij  li 
money  vpone  discharge  to  be  gevin  to  him  in  copleit  payment  of  his  intro- 
missioun  the  said  zeir  1608  and  in  copleit  paymet  of  all  zeiris  preceding  ye 
said  zeir  1608  zeiris  allowing  y'in  ye  acht  pundis  ij  s.  ctenit  in  ye  act  sett  doun 
in  Nouember  1607  zeiris. 

The  Qlk  Day  the  dykin  coveiner  and  dykins  vnderstanding  y'  thair  restis 
in  Hew  Blairis  handis  iij  zeirs  dewtie  inawand  be  him  for  the  few  ferm  of  his 
landis  haldin  of  the  said  hospitall  extending  zeirlie  to  ye  soum  of  ten  inks 
money  and  in  haLLl  to  ye  soum  of  xx  li  money  and  vnderstanding  y*  the  said 
Hew  had  tain  panis  and  travells  vpone  him  for  pfytting  of  sindrie  ye  craftis 
adois  speciallie  anent  the  securiteis  and  ry's  past  bietuix  thame  M''  Jo° 
Howisoun  Likprevik  and  Ernok  hes  yi^foLr  allowit  for  his  panis  tain  as  said 
is  ten  ll  of  the  said  xx  li  and  ordanis  the  said  dykin  coveiner  vpone  rasseit  of 
y^  ten  li  fra  the  said  Hew  to  gif  him  ane  discharge  of  the  haill  xx  li  in  copleit 
paymet  of  the  crop  and  zeir  of  God  1609  zeiris  and  of  all  zeiris  preceding. 

Compt  The  Qlk  Day  the  said  dykin  coveiner  dykins  of  craftis  visito''  of  maltmen 

and  and  meilmen  and  v^s  of  his  counsall  bieing  covenit  to  heir  James  Braidwod 

and  Ninian  Andirsoun  y''  compt  of  thair  charge  and  discharge  of  the  dewtie  of 
the  craftis  hospitall  intromettit  w'  be  thame  as  collectors  of  ye  new  rentell 
dewtie  y''of  and  vther  dewteis  and  anual  rentis  belanging  y^'to  fra  the  term 
of  Alhallowis  160S  zeiris  to  ye  said  feist  1609  zeiris  q^ol  the  pticular  charge 
and  discharge  foUowis. 

James  Braidwodis  charge. 

Item  m  ye  first  rasavit  fra  ye  Laird  Lekprevik  the  anuall  of  fyve  hundry* 
mkis   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  xlll 

Item  fra  the  dykins  for  ye  Hallowmes  and  Candilmes  qrteris  Ixxvj  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  Mathow  Calmeroun  in  p'  of  payment  of  the  auld  retell  dewteis  intro- 
mettit w'  be  him  as  collector  y'of  ....  xxxiij  li 
SuiTia  ....  i<=xlix  li    vis.    viij  d. 


Andersone. 


Ixiij 

ll  vj  s. 

viij  d. 

xlH 

xli)  ll 

xiij  s 

iiij  d. 

•     i 

cxlvj  H 

•      iij 

ll  vj  s. 

viij  d. 

1609]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  23 

Dischargis. 
Item  to  M'  Jo°  Howisoun  for  the  Maxtimes  termes  anuall  1608  zeiris 

Item  to  ye  pwir  men  for  acht  mone' 

Item  to  W""  Neilsoun  M''  of  Work  of  the  hospitall 

Item  to  Dauid  Neill  .... 

Suriia  .... 

Sua  restis  in  ye  coptaris  hand 

Ninian  Andirsonis  charge. 

Item  rasavit  fra  ye  Laird  of  Ernok  at  Witsounday  last  ye  Witsounday  and 
Martimes  termes  anuall  of  the  syluer  inavvand  be  him  to  the  hospitall 
ye  zeir  of  God  1609  zeiris  extending  to  .  .  .  Ixxx  ll 

Item  the  Beltan  and  Lambes  qrter  comptis  of  the  hospitalls  new  rentell 
extending  to   .  .  .  .  .  Ixxvj  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Mair  rasavit  the  vvobsteris  vnlaw  q'in  thay  wer  vnlawed   .  .  xx  ll 

Mair  for  fo'  burgess  ....  xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Suma  ....        j^lxxxix  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Discharge. 

Item  to  Dauid  Neill  for  attending  on  tham  y'  red  ye  hospitall       .  xl  s. 

Item  to  Mr  Jo"  Howiesoun  .  .  .  Ixiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  for  drink  to  M''  Jo°  Howiesouns  wyf  q°  scho  rasavit  ye  syluer        .  xij  s. 

Item  to  James  Mayne  for  firr         ....  xxvj  iiikis. 

Item  to  Mareon  Steill  for  Jo°  Chalmeris  and  Wattie  (  )  hous 

meall  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Item  to  M^  Alex^  Grahame  for  his  fie         .  .  vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  mair  to  him  at  comand  of  the  dykins  for  translatting  of  the  hospitalis 
funda'un  in  Inglische  .  .  .  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  W^  Neilsoun  M^  of  Work  to  ye  hospitall  .  .  Ix  ll 

Item  to  ye  pwir  men  .  .  .  .  .  .  xx  ll 

Item  for  ane  pair  of  schone  to  Simon  Baird  .  .  .  xx  s. 

Item  mair  delyverit  to  W""  NeUsoun  ye  xvj  No''  1609        .  .  ix  ll 

Suma  ....  i<=lxxxviij  ll  xij  s. 

Sua  restis      .....  xxj  s.  iiij  d. 

And  of  the  haill  in  baythe  the  compteris  handis  ye  soume  of     iiij  ll  viij  s. 

Qlk  compt  of  the  charge  and  discharge  hieing  hard  of  baythe  ye  saidis 
compteris  of  thair  intromissioun  ye  zeir  of  God  foirsaid  the  same  is  allowit  to 
thame  in  onibus  and  ar  fund  to  be  restan  achten  be  the  said  James  Braidwod 
of  his  intromissioun  1609  zeiris  iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d.  money  togidder  w'  xix  ihkis 
restan  of  his  intromissioun  i5o8  zeiris  qlk  is  ordanit  to  be  payit  and  delyverit 
to  Thomas  Morsoun  now  dykin  coveiner. 


24 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1609 


The  hospitalis  auld  rentell. 

Lawrie  Schaw  and  Rychie  y''  tenemet  in  Stockwell 

Artho''  Allanis  new  hous  in  Briggait 

Colein  Capbellis  new  bigit  tenement  in  Briggait 

Henrie  Spreul  his  hous  in  Briggait 

Thomas  Mwr  his  hous  in  Briggait 

Jhone  Nesmy'  his  hous  in  Briggait 

Jhone  Barris  hous  in  Briggait 

George  Glasgowis  hous  in  Briggait 

Jo°  Patirsoun  his  hous  in  Briggait 

James  Clerkis  tenement  above  ye  Barrasyett 

Jo"  Donnald  his  hous  in  Saltmerkat 

Mathow  Trumbils  tenement  occupyit  be  George  Hutchisoun 

Rychard  Woddrop  his  tenement  biezond  the  Gallowgait  bwrn 

Ar<i  Hall  his  hous  above  the  croce 

Smythis  tene'  pteanig  to  M"'  Hew  Gibsoun 

Mathow  Colquhoun  and  Jo°  Gillaspie  for  wrycht 

Quentein  Ranking  his  hous  in  Rattounraw 

Jhone  SpreuU  his  hous  in  Drygait 

W'  Clerk  in  Drygait 

Wiu  Kirkland  in  Drygait    . 

James  Hall  for  W™  Allassoun  his  hous  in  Drygait 

Wm  Nicol  his  hous  in  Drygait 

Mair  for  the  hous  he  dwellis  in 

Jhone  Drew  and  Scheiraris  hous  in  Drygait 

W™  Thomsoun  and  James  Wattirstoun  y''  hous  in  Stabilgrein 

Bessie  Colveinis  wast  now  occupyit  be  W™  Reed  . 

The  wast  barn  in  Rattounraw  pteanig  to  Claud  Hamiltoun 


Suma 


V]  s. 
xs. 

xj  s. 
XX  s. 

X  s. 

XX  s. 

xiij  s.  iij  d. 

xxviij  s. 

XV  s. 

xxiiij  s. 

xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

XX  s. 

xiij  s. 

XV  s. 

XX  s. 

xix  s. 

XX  s. 

iiij  ll 

iij  s.  iiij  d. 

xvj  s. 

xvj  s. 

iij  li 

xj  s. 

xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

XV  s. 

xij  s. 

of  Cochnoche 

xxiiij  s. 
xxvj  ll  ix  s.  iiij  d. 


The  hospitallis  new  Rentell  callit  ye  craftis  cotrihutioun. 

The  Smeithis          .              .              .              .              .              .              .  xx  ll 

Tailzo^s            .              .              .              .              .              .              .  XX II 

Cordoneris       .              .              .              .              .              .              .  xx  li 

Wobsteris        .              .              .              .              .              .              .  x  li 

Skinneris          .              .              .              .              .              .              .  x  li 

Cowperis         .......  viij  i 

Baxteris  .  .  .  .  .  .     vj  ll  viij  s.  iiij  d. 

Wrychtis         .......  viij  li 

Measonis         .......  iiij  ll 

Chyrurgeinis    .              .              .              .             .              .      iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 


i6io]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  25 

Bonnetmakeris  .....  liij  s.  iiij  d. 

Flescho''s  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  X  ll 

Maltmen  and  meilmen  .....  xxx  ll 

Suma  ....  i'^lij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Hew  Blair  iiij  aikeris  sett  in  few  to  him  for  ten  irikis. 
Jo"  Dobbie  for  ye  hospitalis  sted  w'out  ye  port  x  fhkis. 

Decimo  Septimo  die  mensis  Ja">  1610. 

The  Oik  Day  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin    coveiner  and  dykins  of  craftis  johneDobies 
togidder  w*  ye  visito'"  of  maltmen  and  meilmen  bieing  covenit  to  cosult  and  m^rks  fra  ye 
advys  anent  the  hospitall  sted  w'  the  ptinents  and   peic  of  comoun  adjacent  hospitall. 
y''to  gevin  to  tham  be  the  toun  quhat  sould  be  done  thaiiw'  efter  consul- 
ta'un  had  y^anent  hes  c5cludit  to  sett  the  sam  in  few  to  Jo"  Dobbie  for  the 
zeirlie  fewdewtie  of  ten  inks  at  termes  vsit  and  wont  and  hes  ordanit  Thomas 
Morsoun  to  pas  vpone  the  grund  of  the  saids  lands  and  thair  in  name  of  the 
craftis  resigne  the  sam  in  ane  of  the  bailleis  handis  for  new  infeftment  to  be 
givin  to  him  his  airis  or  assignayis  of  the  same  and  the  said  Thomas  in  name 
foirsaid  to  rasave  infeftment  of  ye  said  few  dewtie  of  ten  iTiks  coform  to  the 
cotract  past  y^vpone  of  the  dait  of  thir  pfntis  and  that  be  resigna'un  again 
to  be  maid  be  the  said  Jo"  in  fauo^'s  of  the  said  Thomas  dykin  coveiner  in  name 
of  the  craftis  and  y"'  successors. 

The  Qlk  Day  the  said  dykin  coveiner  dykins  of  craftis  and  visito^  having  Deikin 
hard  James  Braidwodis  compt  of  ye  xlvij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d.  as   the   act  sett  doun  d'i'schar^ge^to 
y^anet  ye  acht  of  December  1609  zeiris  beiris  restan    in    his    handis  of  the  James 
pticular  soums  intromettit  w*  be  him  as  collecto''  of  the  hospitalis  dewteis  the  xivj  lib.  vj  s. 
tyme  he  wes  dykin  coveiner  as  ye  act  sett  doun  y^anent  the  13  of  Nor  1507  merks.^'^'^ '^  ° 
zeiris  beiris  and  syklyk  having  hard  the  pticular  compt  of  his  debursingis  in  the 
craftis  eff airis  of  the  ij<=  mks  money  borrowit  be  him  fra  George  Newlandis 
hes  allowit  the  said  as  it  wes  debursit  be  him  and  be  the  tenno''  of  this  pfnt 
act  dischargis  him  y^of  and  acceptis  the  payment  of  the  said  ii<=  mkis  in  and 
vpone  thame  and  y''  successor's  in  office  to  be  maid  be  tham  and  thair  foirsaidis 
to  the  said  George  Newlandis  his  airs  or  assignayis  the  said  James  makand 
thame  and  thair  foirsaidis  frie  of  the  anuall  ret  yi'of  to  Witsounday  nixt  to 
cum  in  the  zeir  of  God  jajvjc  and  ten  zeiris. 

The  saidis  craftis  payand  in  again  to  the  said  James  Braid wod  ye  soum 
of  iiij  ll  .xvj  s.  money. 

The  Qlk  Day  the  dykins  and  visito''  hes  ordanit  ye  act  sett  doun  the  xv  Craftis  taxt 
day  of  Noveber  1609  zeiris  anent  the  twa  hundry'  merkis  borrowit  be  ye  said  M''Vo™lcot '° 
dykin  coveiner  appointit  to  be  delyverit  to  M''  Ro'  Scot  for  the  craftis  pt  of  iiiji^ 
mks  ordanit  to  be  gevin  to  him  for  his  e.xpess  to  Lundoun  to  be  regrat  in  this 


26  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1610 

y""  bulk  q'of  the  tenno''  foUovvis.  Apud  Glasgw  decinio  quinto  die  mensis 
Nouembris  1609  zeiris.  The  Qlk  Day  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin  coveiner  Jo° 
Neper  dykin  of  smeithis  Thomas  WyHe  dykin  of  tailzo''s  Gabriel  Listoun 
dykin  of  cordoneris  Alex''  Calwall  dykin  of  skinneris  Michell  Spens  dykin  of 
bonnetmakeris  W™  Zoung  dykin  of  wrychtis  Rychard  Kirkland  dykin  of 
wobsteris  James  Auldcorn  dykin  of  baxteris  Ninian  Andirsoun  Patrik  Maxwell 
and  Thomas  Fawsyd  breithering  of  his  counsall  bieing  covenit  to  cosult  and 
advys  quhow  and  in  q'  maner  the  1]*=  merkis  appointit  to  be  gevin  be  the  craftis 
to  M''  Ro'  Scot  for  y''  p'  of  his  expess  as  cSmissioner  send  be  the  toun  to  his 
majestie  for  pcuring  supplie  to  the  help  of  the  kirk  brig  and  river  of  Clyd  hes 
cocludit  and  agreit  vpone  that  the  said  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin  coveiner 
pvyd  the  said  !]<=  ffikis  and  gif  his  speciall  band  yi'vpone.  Lj'kas  the  saidis 
dykins  be  the  tenno''  heirof  bindis  and  obleiss  thame  and  y'  successor's  in  office 
to  freithe  and  releis  the  said  Thomas  of  the  said  i]'^  fhkis  at  the  handis  of 
Mathow  Mwr  ihchand  quhomefra  he  hes  borrowit  the  sam  and  y'  at  the  term 
cotenit  in  his  obliga'un  grantit  y'' vpone  and  of  all  penaltie  and  expess  contenit 
yr'in.     Subscrj'vit  be  y''  clerk  at  y""  comand.     Sic  subscrivitur.     Alex''  Grahame. 

Api(a  Glasgw  vigesimo  die  mensis  Aprilis  Anno  1610. 

Bell.  The   Qlk   Day  Thomas   Morsoun   dykin   coveiner   and  remanent   dykins 

bieing  covenit  except  M^  Ro'  Hamiltoun  dykin  of  chyrurgeneris  bieing  covenit 
to  cosult  and  resolue  anent  sindrie  effaris  twiching  the  craftis  speciallie  anent 
M''  Jo°  Bells  v<=  ■&  or  anuall  3'airof  this  zeir  1610  zeiris  hes  all  in  ane  voce  (except 
Rychard  Kirkland  dykin  of  wobsteris)  codiscendit  and  agreit  vpone  to  pvyd 
and  have  in  redines  again  Witsounday  nixt  the  anuall  of  the  said  v<=  li  as  ye 
same  is  sett  doun  in  the  act  imbuikit  y''anent  the  penult  of  Apryll  ye  zeir  of 
God  1609. 

Minister  Bell  The  same  day  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin  coveiner  Jo^  Nep  dykin  of  hemirmen 

James  Fyscher  visito''  Gabriel  Listoun  dykin  of  cordoneris  Thomas  Wylie 
dykin  of  taOzo''s  Alex''  Calwall  dykin  of  skinneris  Dauid  Scheirar  dykin  of 
cowpis  Rychard  Kirkland  dykin  of  wobsteris  Jo^^  Watsoun  dykin  of  flescho''s 
Jo"  Boyd  dykin  of  measonis  W°i  Zoung  dykin  of  wryt's  James  Auldcorn  dykin 
of  baxteris  and  Michell  Spens  dykin  of  bonnetmakeris  togidder  w'  James 
Braidwod,  baillie,  Ninian  Andirsoun  Jo°  Stirhng  Patrik  Maxwell  Jo"  Andirsoun 
Rot  Rowet  and  Thomas  Fawsyd  breithering  of  his  counsall  having  tain  farder 
cosulta'un  anent  ye  said  v^^  ll  qlk  is  appointit  to  be  gevin  to  M'  ]o^  Bell  and 
vnderstanding  that  my  Lord  of  Glasgow  hes  eirnestlie  requeistit  y*  ye  samen 
myt  be  payit  to  him  thay  in  regard  thairof  and  bieing  willing  to  pleaso^  his 
L/  in  ony  thing  y'  cocernis  thame  bot  scheiflie  having  respect  to  ye  said  M''  Jo" 
his  bypast  travels  in  his  fuctioun  of  the  ministrie  togidder  w*  yt  guid  expecta'un 
y'  thay  have  of  him  for  the  tyme  to  cum  and  y*  he  sail  cotinow  a  nurisch  father 
to  ye  great  cofort  of  all  sortis  of  peapill  w'in  yis  bur'  hes  vpone  pvisioun  and 


i6io]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  27 

coditioun  efterspeit  cocludit  and  agreit  to  pvyd  the  said  v"  ll  in  maner  following 
and  delyver  it  to  him  at  Martimes  nixt  to  cum  and  y'  be  ye  cotributioun 
pticularlie  eftir  specifeit  to  be  coUectit  be  the  said  dykins  and  visito''  bietuix  . 
and  ye  first  of  August  and  delyverit  to  ye  said  dykin  coveiner  to  ye  effect 
that  the  said  M''  Jo"  may  rasave  the  sam  at  ye  said  term  of  Martimes  viz  be 
ye  said  visito""  Ixxx  li  be  ye  dykin  of  smeithis  1  merks  be'^ye  dykin  of  tailzo^'s 
i=  merks  be  ye  dykin  of  cowpis  xl  ll  be  ye  dykin  of  cordoneris  jo  fnkis  be  ye 
dykin  of  flescho''s  xl  merkis  be  ye  dykin  of  skinners  xl  ll  be  j'e  dykin  of 
baxteris  xx  ll  be  ye  dykin  of  wobsteris  xl  merks  be  ye  dykin  of  measouns  ten  ll 
be  ye  dykin  of  wry^s  xl  merkis  be  ye  dykin  of  bonnetmakeris  ten  pund  and  be 
(  )  provyding 

alwayis  y'  gif  in  case  it  sail  happin  ye  said  M""  Jo"  to  be  transportit  sua  y'  he 
y'by  sail  no'  exerceis  ye  functioun  of  his  ministrie  w'in  this  burche  that  than 
and  in  y'  case  the  [said  M''  John  shall  be]  bund  to  refund  the  said  fyve  hundry' 
pund  bak  again  to  the  said  dykin  coveiner  dykins  of  craftis  and  y'"  successouris 
w'  sik  coditiouns  to  be  cotenit  in  his  said  band  for  the  delyverie  y^oi  in  case 
foirsaid  as  ye  saidis  craftis  sail  think  necesser  and  expedient. 

The  Qlk  Day  the  said  dykin  coveiner  dykins  and  breithering  of  his  counsall  Gelbrother 
vnderstanding  the  great  debt  qno  this  toun  is  addactit  be  the  injurie  of  bypast  ""^'''*^  v^'^'i^- 
tymes  and  incovenientis  biefallin  the  sam  y^by  and  y'  thair  is  nothing  qlk 
thay  mair  affect  nor  the  releif  y^oi  to  the  end  y'  the  said  bur'  may  the  bettir 
flurische  and  that  ye  inhabitants  friemen  y^'of  may  be  mair  able  to  beir  burding 
hes  cocludit  and  in  ane  voce  agreit  y'  the  xxx  ll  gildbrother  syluer  that  sail  happin 
to  be  rasavit  heirefter  for  the  space  of  viij  zeiris  to  cum  qlk  is  the  tyme  of  the 
sukin  of  the  toun  to  yair  awn  [  ]  be  applyet  to  ye  releif  of  the  said 

debt  and  the  sam  to  be  resavit  and  intromettit  w'  be  the  the'  of  the  said  bur' 
for  the  tyme  vpone  coditioun  and  pvisioun  that  at  the  ische  and  outruning 
of  the  said  viij  zeiris  y'  the  said  xxx  ll  gild  brother  syluer  return  again  to  ye 
craftis  pticular  vse  coform  to  y'  article  sett  doun  in  the  ler  of  gildrie  y^anent. 

Secundo  die  mensis  Junij  Anno  Domini  1610. 

The  Qlk  Day  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin  coveiner  Jo"  Nep  dykin  of  heinirmen  Complaint 
Gabriell  Listoun  dykin  of  cordoneris  Thomas  VVylie  dykin  of  tailzo''s  James  foUotl"^" 
Fyscher  visito'  of  maltmen  and  meilmen  Jo"  Hall  in  place  of  Dauid  Scheirar  yaifvpon 
dykin  of  cowpis  Alex""  Calwall  dykin  of  skinneris  Rychard  Kirkland  dykin  of  aganes  ye 
wobsteris  Jo"  Watsoun  dykin  of  flescho^s  James  Auldcorn  dykin  of  baxteris  ""^y"'^* 
and   Michell   Spens   dykin   of   bonnetmakeris   togidder   w'   James   Braidwod, 
baillie,  Jo"  Andirsoun  Ninian  Andirsoun  Ro'  Rowet  Patrik  Maxwell  Jhone 
Stirling  and  Thomas  Fawsyd  breithering  of  the  said  dykin  coveineris  counsall 
bieing  covenit  to  tak  cognitioun  and  tryell  and  to  gif  decernitor  anent  the 
coplaint  gevin  in  be  Andro  Boyd  dykin  of  measonis  for  himself  and  in  name 
and  biehalf  of  the  m^'s  and  friemen  of  the  said  craft  cotrar  Ar<*  Reid  wry'  and 


28  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1610 

W'""  Zoung  dykin  y^of  and  remanent  breithering  of  the  said  craft  makand 
mentioun  y'  qf  it  was  of  veritie  that  ye  saidis  twa  craftis  hieing  siityme  cojunct 
thay  for  reasonable  and  guid  causs  in  baythe  yf  seuerall  new  grantit  charto''s 
wer  disjoint  to  ye  end  that  thay  my'  be  rewht  be  twa  seuerall  dykins,  lykas 
it  was  speciallie  pvydit  y*  nain  of  tham  sould  exerceis  vtheris  craftis  except 
yt  qFvvt  he  was  foundit  prenteis  at  ye  bieginig  and  y'  navertheles  the  said  Ar"* 
had  exarcesit  ye  measoun  craft  and  leatlie  be  the  owtstreking  of  ane  void  in 
M""  Dauid  Hay  his  houss  and  sklaiting  y'"of  and  sua  had  violattit  and  brokin 
y*  heid  of  the  said  charto''  to  ye  hurt  and  prejudice  of  the  saidis  measonis 
desjTing  thairfoir  the  said  wrag  to  be  tryit  and  the  sam  hieing  sua  fund  the 
said  Art*  my'  be  decernit  in  ye  wrang  he  and  ya  rest  of  wry's  restranit  fra  the 
doing  of  the  lyk  in  tyme  cuing  as  ye  bill  gevin  in  j-airanent  at  mair  lenthe  is 
cotenit  the  saidis  pteis  psonallie  pfnt  thair  ry's  rasonis  and  allegationis  hard 
sein  and  cosidderit  and  y^w'  the  said  daakin  and  breithering  of  his  counsall 
bieing  ryplia  advysit  findis  ya  owtstreking  of  the  said  void  be  the  said  Ar'^ 
Reed  wry'  to  be  a  p'  of  the  measoun  craft  pperlie  bielanging  y^to  and  thair 
charto''  in  y'  heid  violattit  and  brokin  and  y'  biecaus  the  said  Ar<i  bieing  ane 
wry'  could  no'  preive  him  to  be  foundit  prenteis  to  ye  measoun  craft  and 
thairfoir  dacarnis  the  said  Ar<i  in  ya  wrang  for  the  owtstreking  y^of  for  the 
qlk  wrang  sua  done  be  him  cotrar  to  ye  tenno"^  of  the  saidis  wry's  charto''  the 
said  Ar''  is  biecum  in  the  said  dykin  coveinaris  will  remanent  dykins  and 
breithering  foirsaid  and  so  to  mak  sik  satisfactioun  y''foir  as  sail  plais  tham 
[  ]  quha  vpone  dew  cosidderatioun  had  y''anent  is  decernit  and  ordanit 

to  cotent  and  pay  to  ye  said  Thomas  in  name  of  the  saidis  craftis  ye  soum  of 
ten  pundis  money  to  be  applyit  to  ye  weill  of  the  craftis  hospitall  and  pwir 
y''of  and  syklyk  decernis  and  ordanis  the  said  Ar''  and  remanent  breithering 
of  the  said  craft  of  WTychtis  to  decist  and  ceis  in  all  tym  ciiing  fra  ^-e  using  and 
exarcaising  the  said  measoun  craft  heireftar  vndar  the  pain  of  ten  %  money 
to  be  applyit  as  said  is  toties  quoties  thay  or  ony  of  tham  beis  fund  to  exerceis 
the  sam  contrar  the  tenno''  of  thair  said  charto"'. 

Sexto  die  mensis  Odobris  161  o. 

Layitis  for  ye  The  Qlk  Day  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin  convainer  Gabriell  Smy'  dykin  of 

conveincr.  hemmermen  Gabriel  Listoun  dykin  of  cordonaris  Jhona  Mwr  dykin  of  tailzo''s 
James  Fyscher  visito''  of  maltmen  and  meilmen  W™  Luiva  dykin  of  skinneris 
\ym  Hereot  dykin  of  baxteris  Jo"  W'atsoun  last  dykin  in  absence  of  Ro' 
Watsoun  dykin  of  flescho''s  James  Allassoun  dykin  of  wry's  J  hone  Rankein 
dykin  of  measouns  Jo°  Hall  dykin  of  cowpis  W™  Govan  dj'kin  of  bonnet- 
makeris  Jo°  Clerk  dykin  of  wobsteris  togidder  w'  ane  sufficient  nuber  of 
craftsmen  bieing  covanit  to  chuis  owt  twa  psonis  togidder  w'  the  said  dykin 
coveiner  to  be  on  lyttis  to  be  presentit  befoir  the  pvest  bailleis  and  counsall 
y'  ane  of  thame  my'  be  electit  dykin  coveiner  for  this  zeir  to  cum  coform  to  the 


i6io]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  29 

ler  of  gildrie,  hes  be  pluralitie  of  voits  electit  and  chosin    Patrik    Maxwell 
tailzo"'  and  Jo"  Rychie  cowp  togidder  \v'  the  said  Thomas  Morsoun  pfnt  dekin 
coveiner  to  be  on  Ij-ttis  and  to  be   pfntit   befoir  the  saidis  pvest  and  bailleis  . 
to  ye  effect  foirsaid. 

Vigesimo  quarto  die  mensis  Odobris  Anno  Domini  1610. 

The  Qlk  Day  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin  coveiner  efter  matuir  deliberatioun  Dekein 
had  anent  his  counsall  for  ye  zeir  to  cum  hes  nominat  the  haill  dykins  aboue-  co"ns^i*'^^ 
wTyttin  togidder  w'  thir  psonis  following  viz  James  Braidwod,  baillie,  Ro* 
Rowat  Jo°  Andirsoun  Duncan  Sempill  Ninian  Andirsoun  James  Fyscher 
James  Ly^bodie  Alex"'  Calwall  W""  Howie  Thomas  Achisoun  Jo"  Scot  baxter 
Thomas  Fawsyd  Jo"  Nep  Jo"  Rychie  Thomas  Wylie  Patrik  Maxwell  Dauid 
Scheirar. 

Qlk  Day  M''  Alex'  Graham  cotenowit  clerk  for  this  zeir  to  cum  hes  gevin  ciairk. 
hes  athe  of  fidelitie  as  vs  is. 

Simon  Baird  cotenowit  officier.  Officar. 

The  Qlk  Day  the  said  dykin  coveiner  dykins  of  craftis  and  remanent  his  The  dein  of 
counsall  abouewryttin  being  covenit  to  elect  and  chuis  fo''  psonis  of  the  craftis  foimsaii. 
rank  to  be  vpone  the  dean  of  gildis  counsall  for  this  zeir  to  cum  coforme  to  y' 
article  contenit  in  ye  ler  of  gildrie  sett  doun  yi'anent  hes  be  pluralitie  of  vottis 
electit  and  chosin  Jo"  Andirsoun  Ninian  Andirsoun  Patrik  Maxwell  and  Jo" 
Scot  baxter  to  be  vpone  ye  said  dean  of  gildis  counsall. 

Tertio  Noitembris  1610. 

The  Qlk  Day  the  haill  dykins  and  vtheris  of  that  rank  togidder  w'  Walter  Deikin 
Douglas  now  visito''  of  maltmen  and  meilmen  bieing  covenit  to  heir  Thomas  compt. 
Morsoun  dykin  coveiner  his  compt  of  his  charge  and  discharge  of  the  rentell 
dewtie  pteanig  to  ye  craftis  hospitall  anuall  rentis  bielanging  y''to  and  vther 
casualiteis  intromettit  w'  be  him  pteanig  to  ye  same  as  collector  y^of  fra  the 
term  of  Hallowmes  i6og  to  the  said  terme  1610  zeiris  q''of  the  pticular  compt 
followis. 

The  Comteris  charge. 
Imprimis  the  compter  chargis  him  w*  ye  craftis  quarterlie  cotributioun  callit 

ye  new  rentall  extending  to  ye  soum  of  .  j'^lij  1l  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  w*  ye  craftis  auld  rentall  extending  to  .  xxvj  ll  ix  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  restan  in  Ninian  Andirsoun  his  hand  at  ye  futt  of  his  compt 

xiij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  ye  burges  fyve  merkis  fra  Jo"  Campell  tailzof  iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  Ro'  Watsoun  flescho''       .  .  .  iij  ti  vi  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  Ro*  Wilsoun  wobster        .  .  .  iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  Dauid  Fynlay       .  .  .  .  iij  ll  vi  s.  viij  d. 

Item  from  Patrick  Watsoun  .  .  .  iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 


30 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1610 


ii]  li  V 

s.  viij  d 

iij  li  V 

s.  viij  d 

ii]  i  vi  s.  vii]  d 

iij  ti  V 

s.  vii)  d 

iij  H  V 

s.  viij  d 

ii]  li  V 

s.  viij  d 

iij  li  V 

s.  viij  d 

iij  li  V 

s.  viij  d 

ii]  li  V 

s.  viij  d 

Item  from  W™  Reed  waker 
Item  from  Alex^  Allan  litster 
Item  from  Alex^  Rychie  cordoner 
Item  from  James  Measoun  litster  . 
Item  from  James  Crawfurd  measoun 
Item  from  Jo°  Louk  maltman 
Item  James  Pollok  cowp    . 
Item  from  Fillan  Moriesoun 
Item  from  Jo"  Schadden  maltman 


The  Charge  of  ye  xxx  li  gildhreither  syliier  and  xxv  s.  payit  he 

burges  sonis  5"  hes  ye  friedome  y'by. 

Item  from  Ar<i  Thomsoun  tailzor   .....  xxx  I1 

Item  from  James  Lyndsay  tailzo''                ....  xxx  li 

Item  from  Jo°  Mathie  cordoner     .              .              .              .              .  xv  li 

Item  fra  Jo°  Pedie  skinner              .....  xxv  s. 

Item  from  Alex''  Stirling  bonnetmaker        ....  xxv  s. 

Item  from  Ronnald  Snodgers  cordoner        ....  xxv  s. 

Item  from  Jo°  Luive  skinner          .....  xxv  s. 

Item  from  Malcum  Hart  tailzor     .....  xxv  s. 

Item  from  Gilbert  Auldcorn  skinner            ....  xxv  s. 

Item  from  Mathow  Fyscher            .....  xxv  s. 

From  Jo"  Walker                .              .              .              .              .              .  iij  li 

From  Ro'  Gemmill  skinner              .....  xxv  s. 

From  Andro  Snyp  cowp     ......  xxv  s. 

From  George  Pollok  cowp               .....  xxv  s. 

From  Dauid  Ingram  skiner             .....  xxv  s. 

From  W™  Andirsoun  cordoner        .....  xxv  s. 

From  Jo"  Wilsoun  cordoner            .              .              .              .      '        .  xxv  s. 

From  W""  Lidgait  cordoner             .....  xxv  s. 

From  Weaker  Scheirilaw     ......  xxv  s. 

From  Jo°  Hebburn  cordoner           .....  xxv  s. 

From  James  Mudie  maltman          .....  xxv  s. 

Charge  of  the  dnual  rent. 

Item  ye  anual  rent  of  the  fyve  hundry'  merk  in  Ro'  Hogszairdis  hands  fra 

Martimes  1609  to  Martimes  1610  extending  to             .              .  xl  ll 

Item  the  Mertimes  term  1609  zeiris  of  the  anual  rent  inawand  be  ye  Laird 

Ernok              .              .              .              .              .              .              .  xl  li 

Item  fra  Hew  Blair  restan  of  all  byganis  preceding  ye  crop  1609  .  x  li 

Item  rasavit  fra  Mathow  Calmeroun  restan  in  his  hands  coform  to  ane  act  sett 

doun  yairanent  the  tym  of  Ninian  Andirsouns  intromissioun  viij  % 

Item  from  Eupham  Wilsoun  .  .  .  xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 


i6io]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  31 

Charge  of  the  willit  syluer  to  ye  pwir  and  vther  syiuer  gevin 

of  benevolence. 

Item  be  Jo°  Muntgomerie  .  .  .  .  .  xx  s. 

Item  from  Alex""  Cahvall    .  .  .  .  .  .  xx  s. 

Item  from  Jo°  Neper         .  .  .  .  .  .  xx  s. 

Item  from  Jo"  Rychie        .  .  .  .  .  .  ix  ll 

Item  from  Maran  Scot  relict  of  vmq"  Ro*  Chirnsyd  and  left  in  legacie  be 

him     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  XX  ■& 

Item  from  \V°i  Mwr  fleschor  .  .  .  .  .  ix  li 

Item  from  Jo''  Miller  .  .  .  .  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  from  James  Inglis  pvest         .....  xvj  ll 

Item  from  George  Mwr   left  in  legacie  be  vmqH  Jo"  Mwr  skipper  his  broy^    x  li 
Item  from  James  Fyscher  .  .  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Item  from  James  Mayne  in  name  of  Jo'  Hereof  his  spous  and  left  in  legacie  be 

vmq"  W™  Hereof  baxter         .  .  .  vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Suiiia  of  the  haill  charge  extendis  to         v<!xxxviij  ll  xs.   viij  d. 

The  Comieris  discharge. 

Item  in  ye  first  to  W™  Neilsoun  for  farder  building  of  the  hospitall  xx  li 
Item  to  James  Elphinstoun  for  twa  gles  windois  to  ye  hospitall  chapell  x  ll  x  s. 
Item  to  M''  Jo°  Houisoun  his  Martimes  anuall  i6og  zeiris  Ixiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  to  W"^  Neilsoun  y'  wes  restan  achten  to  him  of  his  debursingis  at  his 

compt  making  as  ye  samen  beiris        ....  iiij  ll 

Item  for  ye  making  of  the  obliga-un  grantit  to  Ro'  Hogszaird  vj  s.  viiij  d. 
Item  to  Ro'  Spens  for  ganging  throw  the  toun  w'  pclama~un  anent  ye  hospitall 

sted    ........  viij  s. 

Item  to  James  Aiken  for  nyne  ells  blew  claithe  to  be  twa  gownis  to  ye  pwir 

men  at  xxxj  s.  ye  ell  sua         ....  xiij  ll  xix  s. 

Item  for  ye  making  of  thame         .  .  .  .  .  xx  s. 

Item  for  thrie  coverings  to  ye  beddis  in  ye  hospitall  .  v  ll  viij  s. 

Item  q°  we  agreit  w*  M''  Ro*  Herbiesoun  .  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Item  for  obteining  of  decreit  aganst  Maran  Scot    .  .  .  xx  s. 

Item  to  M''  Dauid  Gibsoun  for  ye  anuall  of  his  ij<=  merkis  .  xviij  l 

Item  to  M"^  Alex"^  Grahame  for  his  fie         .  .  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  nyne  deallis  to  be  furmes  and  twa  to  be  ye  buird  to  ye  hospitall 

vij  li  viij  s. 
Item  mair  for  ane  knappell  to  be  twa  heidis  to  ye  buird   .  .  viij  s. 

Item  to  James  Mayn  for  ye  buirdin  making    and    the  thrie  furmes  w'    the 

brandtrie  of  his  awn  tyber       .....  viij  li 

Item  for  naillis       ......  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  glew  and  his  morning  drink  .  .  .  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  Alex'  Mayn  of  drink  syluer  .  .  .  .  vj  s. 


32  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1610 

Item  for  pennalein  to  ye  windois  .  .  .  .  vs. 

Item  for  ye  stain  workmanschip  of  ye  hospitallis  foir  zett  .  viij  li 

Item  for  the  stanis  yi'of  leiding  of  the  stain  and  drink       .  .  xxv  s. 

Item  to  Ar<i  Sudderland  for  pointig  of  the  almoushous       .  xxvj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  James  Rankein  for  rigein  stanis  and  onputting  of  thame  vj  li  xij  s. 
Item  to  M''  Jo"  Howiesoun  for  ye  Witsounday  term  1610  Ixiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  for  leiding  of  the  threttie  twa  deallis  to  3'e  almoushous         .  x  s. 

Item  for  the  karieing  of  ane  lettir  to  Ernok  .  .  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  M''  Vmphra  Blamscheillis  for  attending  ye  caus  betuix  M'  Jo°  Howiesoun 

and  Schawtoun  qlk  cocernit  ye  craftis  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Item  for  twa  dosin  of  collis  to  ye  almoushous        .  .  vj  ll  xxxij  d. 

Item  to  Michaell  Lagne      .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Item  to  the  almous  men  .  .  .  Ixxiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  Simon  Bairne  to  by  ane  pair  of  schone     .  .  .  x.x  s. 

Item  to  Ar<^  Heygat  clerk  for  extract  of  the  seasing  grantit  be  J  hone  Dobbie 

to  ye  almoushous         .  .  .  .  .  .  iij  li 

Item  restan  in  Mathow  Calmerouns  handis  of  the  xxvj  li  ix  s.  viij  d.  cotenit 

in  ye  hospitallis  auld  rentall  dewties  gevin  wp  in  my  charge  q'of  he  hes 

resavit  na  payment  and  q'"of  the  possesso''s  hes  no*  bein  as  zit  in  vs 

iij  li  iiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  restan  in  M''  Ro'  Hamiltoun  handis  dykin  of  chyrurgenis  as  y^  p'  of  the 

cotributioun  callit  ye  hospitalls  new  rentell     .  .       iij  1  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  George  Newlandis  anuall  to  Witsounday  1611  zeiris  .  xvj  li 

Nota  that  the  Laird  of  Ernock  his  Witsounday  term  1610  zeiris  at  the  compting 

heirof  is  no'  payit  be  him  and  swa  nather  in  ye  charge  nor  discharge. 

SuiTia  of  the  haill  discharge  extendis  to     iij^^liiij  ll  iiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Sua  restis  in  the  comptaris  handis  de  claro  j<=lxxxiiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Qlk  compt  being  hard  and  allowit  y''  was  fund  to  be  restan  in  ye  comptaris 
[hands]  j<=lxxxiiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d.  money  q^'of  yair  is  ij'=  merkis  inawand  to  M^ 
Dauid  Gibson  ordanit  to  be  payit  at  yis  term  of  Martimes  1610  zeiris  to  him 
xl  s.  to  if  Alex""  Grahame  yair  clerk  for  his  panis  in  forming  of  the  securitie 
bietuix  the  craftis  and  Jhone  Dobbie  anent  ye  setting  of  the  hospital]  sted 
in  few  to  him  and  vther  xl  s.  money  to  James  Braidwod  bailhe  restan  awand 
to  him  as  his  comptis  fittit  beiris  sua  restis  de  claro  in  ye  copteris  handis 
xlvij  li  money. 

Ordanis  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin  coveiner  to  borrow  (  ) 

VUimo  Octohris  1610. 

Frieraan  Ro'  Gray  tailzo'  is  admittit  burges  and  frieman  of  ye  bur'  and  citie  of 

^"^'-  Glasg^v. 


i6ii]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  33 

17  Ja">  161 1. 
George  Birrell  chyrurgein  admittit  burges.  Burges  Birreli. 

24  Ja">  161 1. 
Thomas  Thomsoun  chyrurgein  admittit  burges.  Surges 

Thomsone. 

14  Feh">  161 1. 
Jhone  Corbet  prenteis  admittit  burges  be  his  prentischip.  Burges 

21  Fe6"'  161 1. 

Ro*  VVatsoun  tailzo'  admittit  burges.  Burges 

Watsone. 

4  Aprilis  1611. 
Jhone  Baird  wobster  admittit  burges.  Burges  Baird. 

The  Qlk  Day  Jhone  Ingram  prenteis  to  Dauid  Ingram  skinner  cSforme  to  Prenteis 
yair  indentof  qlk   is   of   the    dat,  at  Glasgw  ye  xxviij  of  Apryll  1610  zeiris,    "^^  ^^^" 
is  buikit  in  ye  dykin  coveineris  buik  coform  to  ye  article  of  the  ler  of  gildrie 
sett  doun  y''anent. 

James  Rawen  sone  to  Isobell  Snodgers  prenteis  to  James  Rawen  skinner  is  Prenteis 
buikit  as  prenteis  to  him  coform  to  y'  indentof  of  the  dat  ye  xvij  Decembris 
1610. 


Apud  Glasgw  decimo  quinto  die  mensis  Maij  1611. 

The  Qlk  Day  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin  coveiner  Gabriell  Smy'  dykin  of  Act  anent 
smeithis  Jo"  Mwr  dykin  of  tailzo's  Gabriell  Listoun  dykin  of  cordoneris  W™  burgess  be  yair 
Luive  dykin  of  skynneris  Jo°  Clerk  dykin  of  vvobsteris  W™  Hereot  dykin  of  ^^^"ve'^'"^ 
baxteris  Jhone  Rankein  dykin  of  measonis  James  Allassoun  dykin  of  wry"^  maisters  of  ye 
W™  Govan  dykin  of  bonnetmakeris  James  Braidwod,  baillie,  Jo"  Andirsoun  gfve  y air  ay'es 
Ninian  Andirsoun   Alex''  Calwall   and  remanent   breithering  of  his  counsall  ''^oygjjj'^ 
hieing  covenit  to  cosult  and  advys  anent  diuers  and  sindrie  causs  tending  to  baiiiies  and 
ye  Weill  of  the  craftis  and  tiurisching  of  the  estait  y^'of  w'in  ye  said  bur*  and  they  have 
vnderstanding  that  the  provest  bailleis  and  counsall  for  avoyding  of  all  collusioun  ^"'^^an^dlwa 
betuix  m''  and  prenteis  in  all    tyme   cuing   hes   sett   doun   ane   laudable   act  zeir  wy'wayis 
and  statute  anent  ye  maner  quhow  y'  prenteiss  sail  be  admittit  to  ye  friedome  ressavit 
and  libertie  of  ane  burges  and  gilbrother  be  vteu  of  y'  ry'  cofoim  to  y'  article  t'"'^g^*- 
sett  doun  in  ye  ler  of  gildrie  sett  doun  yi'anent  and  having  imbracit  the  sam 
as  ane  lawdable  statute  sett  doun  for  weill  of  bay*  rankis  as  weill  merchands 
as  craftis  hes  ordanit  y'  ye  said  act  be  insert  and  regrat  in  ye  dykin  coveineris 
buik  and  the  extract  y^'of  gevin  fur'  to  everie  dykin  y'  everie  pticular  craft 
and  frieman  y''oi  may  be  acquent  yi'vvt  y'  nain  of  thame  pretend  ignorance 
heiranent  in  ony  tyme  heirefter  q^of  the  tenno'  followis.     In  ye  counsall  hous 
c 


34 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1611 


of  the  bur*  and  citie  of  Glasgw  ye  xiiij  day  of  Apryll  161 1  zeiris  bieing  covenit 
the  pvest  bailleis  and  counsall.  The  Oik  Day  the  provest  bailleis  and  counsall 
bieing  covenit  efter  advys  and  cosideratioun  had  be  tham  of  the  great  abvs 
done  in  tyme  bygain  in  admitting  of  prenteiss  to  be  burgess  vpone  testifica-un 
vnder  ye  hand  wTeit  of  the  clerk  of  thair  craft  and  y'  vpone  declaratioune  of 
thair  m'"s  y'  thay  have  servit  copleitlie  the  tyme  of  thair  indento''  as  prenteiss 
w*  twa  zeir  for  meit  and  fie  efter  ye  owtrining  y'of  albeit  it  be  trew  that  sindrie 
ar  admittit  quha  hes  no'  servit  ye  full  tyme  as  is  abouewttin  and  y*  be 
collusioun  betuLx  the  m''  and  the  prenteis  to  ye  great  hurt  of  ye  craftis,  for 
remeid  q^'of  it  is  cocludit  and  ordanit  y*  na  prenteis  heirefter  sail  be  admittit 
burges  except  his  m''  copeir  w'  him  in  prns  of  the  pvest  bailleis  and  counsall 
for  ye  tyme  and  y''  the  m"^  to  gif  his  athe  solemnlie  y'  ye  said  prenteis  hes  servit 
ye  space  of  vij  zeiris  according  to  his  indento'  and  vy''  twa  zeiris  efter  his 
prenteischip  for  meit  and  fie  and  it  bieing  fund  y*  ye  said  prenteis  hes  sua 
servit  the  dean  of  gild  to  admit  ye  prenteis  burges  vpone  testifica^un  vnder 
the  hand  wreit  of  the  clerk  of  the  bur*  for  ye  tyme  and  syklyk  ordanis  that  all 
prenteiss  als  weill  of  merchandis  as  craftis  to  be  buikit  in  ye  buikis  of  the  dean 
of  gOd  for  ye  merchandis  and  buikis  of  ye  dykin  coveiner  for  ye  craftis  and  y* 
q°  thay  first  enter  to  y''  maisteris  vtherwayis  no'  to  be  rasavit  burgess  or 
gildbreither  and  that  thay  report  y^  testifica~un  y^anent  vtherwayis  no'  to  be 
admittit. 


Craftis  stentit 
in  ij°  lib.  for 
susteining  the 
pley  aganes 
Dumbertane 
to  be  obtenit 
of  his  majesty. 


Apiid  Glasgw  octauo  Jimij  1611. 

The  Qlk  Day  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin  coveiner  and  haill  dykins  of  craftis 
togidder  w'  Walter  Dowglas  visito"'  of  maltmen  and  meilmen  James  Braidwod, 
baillie,  Ro'  Rowet  James  Fyscher  Fatrik  Maxwell  and  Jhone  Govan  for  ye 
coidoneris  bieing  covenit  to  cosult  and  advys  quhow  and  in  q'  maner  the  ij<= 
pundis  appointit  to  be  coUectit  of  the  craftis  rank  for  susteaning  of  the  pley 
aganst  Dumbarten  and  for  owtredding  of  the  chargis  to  be  debursit  anet  ye 
ratifica~un  de  nouo  of  his  ma"  of  the  touns  auld  liberteis  coform  to  ane  act 
of  counsall  sett  doun  heiranent  ye  day  and  dait  heirof,  efter  consulta-un  had 
heiranent  hes  codiscendit  y'  everie  craft  be  stentit  as  the  sam  sail  fall  be  voit 
of  the  rest  of  the  dykins  and  ye  half  of  the  soum  stentit  to  be  collectit  and  in 
radiness  again  Tysday  nixt  to  ye  effect  that  ye  samein  and  supplus  y'  sail 
happin  [to]  be  restan  may  be  imployit  to  ye  effect  foirsaid,  quha  and  everie 
ane  of  the  saidis  craftis  bieing  voittit  be  pluralite  of  voitis  ar  stentit  in  maner 
followdng  to  wit — 


Smytheis    . 

Tailzo''s 

Cowpis 

Cordoneris 

Wobsteris 


xvj  ll 
xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

XV  II 

xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
XV  li 


i6ii]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


35 


Skynneris  . 

XV  1l 

Wryts 

xH 

Baxteris     . 

vii]  li 

Measonis    . 

viij  ll 

Fleschofs    . 

XV  ll 

Bonnetmakeris 

vH 

Visitor  of  maltmen  and  meilmen 

xlti 

Gairdneris 

iiij  li 

Qlk  stent  sett  doun  as  is  aboue  pticularlie  expreimit  is  to  be  devydit  in 
tvva  ptis  ye  half  y^of  is  ordanit  to  be  collectit  again  Tysday  nixt  for  ye  effect 
foirsaid. 


Lytis  for  ye 
deikin 


Apud  Glasgw  (  )  die  mensis  Odobris  1611. 

The  Qlk  Day  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin  coveiner  Gabriell  Smyt  dykin  of 
hemirmen  Ro'  Hogszard  dykin  of  cordoneris  Walter  Dowglas  visito"^  of  maltmen  convdner. 
and  meilmen  Thomas  Wylie  dykin  of  tailzo^s  Jhone  Pedie  dykin  of  skineris 
Jhone  Rankein  dykin  of  measouns  James  Reed  dykin  of  wry's  Wf"  Kirkland 
dykin  of  wobsteris  W'"  Hereof  dykin  of  baxteris  Ro'  Watsoun  dykin  of  flescho''s 
and  Jo"  Brounsyd  dykin  of  bonnetmakeris  and  M"^  Ro'  Allassoun  dykin  of 
chyrurgenis  James  Scheillis  dykin  of  cowpis  togidder  w'  ane  sufhciet  nuber 
of  the  rank  of  craftis  breithering  of  his  counsall  hieing  covenit  to  chuis  owt 
twa  psonis  of  the  craftis  to  be  on  lyt  w*  ye  said  dykin  coveiner  to  be  pfntit 
befoir  ye  pvest  bailleis  and  counsall  y'  ane  of  tham  my'  be  electit  dykin  coveiner 
for  this  zeir  to  cum  coform  to  the  ler  of  gildrie  hes  be  pluralitie  of  vottis  electit 
and  chosin  Ninian  Andirsoun  cordoner  and  James  Fyscher  maltman  togidder 
w'  the  said  Thomas  Morsoun  pfnt  dykin  coveiner  to  be  on  lyttis  and  presentit 
befoir  the  saidis  pvest  and  bailleis  to  ye  effect  foirsaid. 


Apud  Glasgw  decinio  nono  die  mensis  Novembris  1611. 

The  Qlk  Day  Ninian  Andirsoun  dykin  coveiner  and  remanent  dykins  Deikin 
abouewryttin  hieing  covenit  that  yay  may  heir  and  know  the  psonis  the  said  counsall. 
Ninian  hes  chosin  to  be  vpone  his  counsall  hes  biesyd  the  saidis  dykins  nominat 
yir  psonis  viz  James  Braidwod  Ro'  Rowet  Jo°  Andirsoun  Duncan  Sempill 
Thomas  Morsoun  Jhone  Hall  James  Fyscher  Alex""  Calwall  Patrik  Maxwell 
Thomas  Fawsyd  W™  Howie  Thomas  Achisoun  Gabriell  Listoun  Jo"  Sterling 
W"  Stalker  Jo°  Scot  baxter  Jo°  Crawfurd  to  be  vpone  his  counsall  for  this 
zeir  to  cum  quha  hes  gevin  thair  athis  of  fidelitie  as  vse  is. 


The  sam  day  Jo°  Andirsoun  Thomas  Morsoun  Alex^  Calwall  and  Jo°  Four 
t  baxter  ar  be  pluralitie  of  vottis  electit  and  chosin 
the  ciaftis  rank  to  be  vpone  the  dean  of  gildis  counsall 


Scot  baxter  ar  be  pluralitie  of  vottis  electit  and  chosin  to  be  the  for  psonis  of  '="*"^™^°  °" 


ye  dean  of 
gild  his 
counsall. 


36 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1611 


Prenteis 
Pincartoun. 


Prenteis 
Darleithe. 


Prenteis 
Cumming. 


Prenteis 
Listoune. 


The  Qlk  Day  Costein  Pincartoun  skinner  preteis  to  Jo°  Pedie  dykin  of 
skinneris  coform  to  the  indento''  sett  doun  bietuix  tham  in  anno  i6og  zeiris  is 
buikit  that  he  may  rasave  the  benefeit  of  his  friedom  y'by  coform  to  ye  act 
of  counsall  sett  doun  y''anent  of  ye  dait  the  xiiij  day  of  Apryll  161 1  zeiris  and 
ordanit  to  be  insert  in  ye  dykin  coveineris  buik  qlk  is  of  the  dait  ye  xv  day  of 
Maij  1611  zeiris. 

The  sam  day  Jo°  Darleithe  skinner  is  buikit  as  prenteis  to  Ale.xf  Calwall 
coform  to  y''  indento''  daittit  ye  vj  day  of  Feb'"'^  1610  zeiris. 

The  sam  day  Ar<i  Cyming  sone  to  Mathow  Cyming  of  Pomadie  prenteis 
to  James  Reed  wry'  is  buikit  as  prenteis  to  him  coform  to  y^  indetC. 

The  sam  day  James  Listoun  prenteis  to  Jo°  Kirkwood  cordoner  is  buikit 
in  ye  dykin  coveineris  buik  y*  he  as  prenteis  to  him  may  have  his  libertie  y^by 
coform  to  ye  act  of  counsall  of  the  dait  foirsaid  and  be  vtew  of  the  ler  of  gildrie 
and  indento"'  sett  doun  bietuix  tham  in  anno  1607  zeiris. 


Prenteis  Ros. 


Prenteis 
Leidgat. 


Prenteiss 
Bryce  and 
.MiUer. 


24  Decembris  1611. 

Andro  Fynlay  prenteis  to  Jo°  Pedy  skinner  buikit  ye  xxiiij  DCs  1611 
as  prenteis  coform  to  y^  indento""  and  his  entrie  qlk  is  iij  No''  1603. 

The  Qlk  Day  Alex''  Roos  prenteis  to  Walter  Scheirilaw  is  buikit  in  ye 
dykin  coveineris  buik  y*  he  y'by  may  have  ye  libertie  of  his  prentischip 
coforme  to  y'  article  contenit  in  ye  ler  of  gildrie  and  act  of  counsall  sett  doun 
y'anent  sensyn  and  coforme  to  indento''  set  doun  bietuix  tham  of  the  dait, 
at  Glasgw  the  xij  of  Ja""  1610  zeiris. 

The  Qlk  Day  Gilbert  Lidgait  son  to  Jo"  Lidgait  in  Dernlie  is  buikit  as 
prenteis  to  Jo"  Lidgait  cordoner  in  ye  deikin  coveineris  buik  y'  he  may  rasave 
ye  benefeit  of  his  pretischip  coforme  to  ye  ler  of  gildrie  and  act  of  counsall  sett 
doun  y''anent  and  y'  coform  to  ye  indento""  sett  doun  bietuix  tham  of  ye  dait 
the  sext  of  November  1609  zeiris  and  his  etrie  coform  y^to  ye  day  and  dait 
foirsaid. 

22  /a'*'  1612. 

The  Qlk  Day  Jo"  Bryce  and  Andro  Miller  prenteiss  to  James  Pedie  skinner 
ar  buikit  in  ye  deikin  coveineris  buik  that  thay  thairby  may  rasave  the  benefeit 
of  thair  preteischip  coform  to  y'  article  contenit  in  ye  ler  of  gildrie  and  act 
of  counsall  sett  doun  y''anent  and  coforme  to  ye  indeto's  sett  doun  bietuix 
thame  of  the  daitis  rep'"^  ye  said  Jo"  Bryce  ye  5  October  1607  ye  said  Andro 
Miller  ye  thrid  of  Julij  1609,  ye  said  Jo"  eterit  ye  dait  foirsaid  and  the  said 
Andro  ye  xvij  M''che  preceding  ye  indeto''. 


i6i2]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


37 


The  Qlk  Day  Michaell  Fyscher  prenteis  to  Patrik  Gemill  skinner  zounger  Prenteis 
is  buikit  in  ye  dykin  coveiners  buik  y'  yi'by  he  may  rasave  the  benefeit  of  his 
prenteischip  coform  to  ye  ler  of  gildrie  and  act  of  counsall  sett  doun  y'^anet 
qlk  indentC  is  of  the  dait  ye  alevint  of  Ja^  1609  and  quhais  etrie  wes  at  ye 
sam  tyme. 


conveinais 


Thomas  Morsouns  compt  as  dykin  coveiner  bieing  maid  as  is  pticularlie  Deikin 
efterspeit  and  allovvit  ye  xiij  Nof'^  1611  is  ordanit  to  be  buikit  in  maner  as  compT 
efter  followis. 

Thomas  Morsoun  his  compt  of  his  intromissioun  w'  ye  craftis  dewteis 
charge  and  discharg  y'^ol  as  dykin  coveiner  fra  Michaelmes  1610  to  Michaelmes 
161 1  zeiris. 

Charge. 

Restan  in  ye  compteris  handis  at  ye  futting  of  his  compt  ye  last  zeir  xlvij  I1 
The  craftis  new  rentell       ....  jf^lij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  ye  craftis  auld  rentell  .  .  .  xxvj  I1  ix  s.  viij  d. 

Hew  Blairis  few  dewtie      .  .  .  .  vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Jo°  Dobbeis  few  dewtie      .  .  .  .  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Eufam  Wilsoun  relict  of  Patrik  Walker      .  .  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

From  M"'  Ro'  Herbiesoun  sex  zeiris  by  run  dewteis  of  his  zaird  in  Deinsyd  ilk 

zeir  iiij  li  x  s.  iiij  d.     Sua        .  .  .  xxvij  li  ij  s. 

Item  from  ye  Laird  Ernok  ye  Witsounday  and  Martimes  termes  1610  and  ye 

Witsounday  term  161 1  zeiris  .....  j<=xx  ll 

Item  from  Jo"  Law  in  Wattirfit  Jo"  Allassoun  in  Cartisbrig  and  Jo"  Wilsoun 

in  Mearnis  ye  anuall  of  iijf^  merkis  ye  Mei  times  term  1610  and  Witsounday 

1611    ........        .xxiiij  ll 

Item  from  Jo"  Pedy  skinner  for  ane  servand  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Item  from  Patrik  Maxwell  of  promeist  syluer         .  .  .  iij  ll 

Item  from  Jo"  Zoung  cowp  pmeist  syluer.  .  .  .  iij  ll 

Item  from  Jo"  Rychie  cowp  .  .  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Item  from  W"*  Mwr  fieschc  .  .  .  .  .  xl  s. 


Burgess  y'  fyve  merkis 

Item  from  James  Broun  cor  doner 
Item  from  James  Corbet  tailzo'' 
From  Ale.x''  Wilsoun  wobst 
From  Rot  Wyning 
From  Jo"  Langue  fyscher 
From  Jo"  Imbrie  cordoner 
From  Cudbert  Steuart  tailzo'' 

Suma  of  ye  haill  charge  extendis  to 


iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

iiij'^lj  ll  iij  s.  iiij  d. 


38  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1612 

The  compteris  discharge. 

To  W  Jon  Howiesoun  for  ye  Mertimes  terme  1610  and  Witsounday  terme 
1611  zeiris       .....  j<^x.xvi  \  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  Jo°  Nicoll  for  his  agent  fie  anent  Ernok  .  .  xl  s. 

Item  to  M^'  Ro'  Learmit  advocat  .  .  iiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  Mr  Ro'  Learmitis  man       .....        xxiiij  s. 

Item  to  ye  measeris  .....  xxvj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  At"!  Hej-gat  for  Eufam  Wilsouns  seasing  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Item  for  partchment  to  wTyt  ye  new  rentell  on     .  .  .  vj  s. 

Item  to  Mr  Alex""  Grahame  .  .  .  vj  t  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  M^  Jo°  Bell  to  mak  owt  his  fyve  ^  ll         .  Iiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  at  ye  delyverie  of  ye  syluer  to  ye  said  M^  Jo"  .  .  xiij  s. 

Item  gevin  to  Dauid  WUsoun  for  his  service  done  in  ye  craftis  effairis  at 
comand  of  James  Braidwod  and  Ninian  Andirsoun  as  having  power  sua  to 
do  coform  to  ane  act  sett  doun  y^anent  .  .  .  x  ll 

Item  to  Mathow  Calmeroun  his  fie  .  .  iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  Simon  Baird  for  twa  pair  schon  he  hes  zeirlie  for  his  service        xlviij  s. 

Item  for  ane  cruik  and  ane  pair  pot  bowlis  to  ye  almoushous    xxxiiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  Ro'  Blair  for  ye  pcept  aganst  Ernok         .  .  .  xx  s. 

Mair   for  leris   purchast   aganst   Ernok  \'pone  ye   sam   jjcept      .    iij  li  iij  s. 

Item  to  Mathow  Fischer  for  charging  of  Ernok      .  .  .  xl  s. 

Item  for  xxxiij  dealis  in  ye  almoushous     .  .  .  xvj  li  x  s. 

Mair  for  ane  pynt  wyne  drunkin  w'  Ernok  .  .  .  viij  s. 

Item  ye  anuell  of  the  sylver  borrowit  to  pay  M'  Jo°  Howiesoun  w'  ye  Martimes 
term  1610  and  Witsounday  161 1  zeiris  .  .  .  viij  ll 

Item  to  Michaell  Lang        .  .  .  .  .  .  xx  s. 

Item  mair  debursit  for  collis  to  ye  almoushous  mair  nor  ye  vj  s.  peiss  come  to 
yt  I  rasavit     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  iij  ll 

Item  to  ye  almoushous  ye  said  zeir  pwir  y^oi         .  Ixxiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  restan  in  Mathow  Calmerouns  handis  of  ye  xxvj  li  ix  s.  iuj  d.  auld  rentell 
dewtie  gevin  wp  in  my  charg  qi'of  thay  have  no'  bein  in  vse  of  paj'ment 
as  zit  .  .  .  .  .  iij  li  iiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Mair  in  W™  Nicollis  hand  .  .  .  .  iij  li  xj  s. 

Mair  restan  in  M^  Ro'  Hamiltouns  hads     .  .  iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Suma  of  ye  haill  discharge  extendis  to  iij<=.xxxv  li  xvij  s.  iiij  d. 
Sua  restis  coform  to  charge  and  discharge  j<=xvj  ll  xiiij  s. 

Deikin  The  Qlk  foirsaid  soum  togidder  w'  sua  meakl  mair  as  makis  ij<=  merkis 

deiktoes      °     money  hieing  lent  to  Jo°  Cochran  in  Fermneis  and  his  ca^'s  viz  Jo°  Jamesoun 

discharges  and  ^-^^  James  Lyndsay  travello""  ye  Martimes  term  161 1  and  Witsounday  term 

1612  zeiris  coptit  y''  is  fund  nathing  to  be  restan  in  ye  compteris  handis  sua 

y'  he  is  exonerit  y''of.     Lykas  he  exoneris  ye  dykins  and  y^  craftis  of  all  comptis 

ye  tym  of  his  intromissioun  or  debursings  for  tham  or  in  y^  names. 


i6i2]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  39 

Ordanis  fyve  1  to  be  gevin  to  Gabriell  Smy'  for  ye  irn  wark  furnist  to  the  viib.  to  Smy'. 
bell  be  him. 

The  Qlk  Day  the  craf tis  vnderstanding  y '  Walter  Dowglas  had  debursit  xx  Ub.  for 
sindrie  soums  of  money  for  yam  the  tym  of  trubbilis  biesyd  his  travellis  q^of  Douglas. 
as  zit  na  recopens  was  maid  as  zit  ordanis  y^'foir  xx  1i  to  be  gevin  to  him  in 
recopens  y'of. 

Thone  Glen  and  W™   Boeill    admittit  and   rasavit  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  Puirmenin 

•'  .  ,  °  ^  ^  ye  hospitaU. 

as  pwir  men  yi^of. 

The    01k  Day  W""  Stalker    be  pluralitie  of  vottis  is  electit  and  chosin  Stalker 

•  collecto' 

collector  of  the  hospital  rentis  for  yis  zeir  to  cum  and  to  ye  nixt  electioun. 

Decimo  quinto  die  mensis  Jtdij  i6i2. 

The  Qlk  Day  Ninian  Andirsoun  dykin  coveiner  Gabriell  Smy'  dykin  of  Act  aganes  ye 
smeythis   Walter   Dowlgas   visito''  of  maltmen   and  meilmen   Ro'  Hogszard  hospiTaU^for 
dykin  of  cordoneris  Thomas  Wylie  dykin  of  tailzo's  W^  Luive  in  place  of  Jo°  ^^^^l^^[  ^"^ 
Pedie  dykin  of  skinneris  bieing  absent  W°^  Hereof  dykin  of    baxteris  W""  craftis 
Kirkland  dykin  of  wobsteris  Jo"  Rankein  dykin  of  measouns  James  Scheillis  towy'sw'wy' 
dykin  of  cowpis  James  Reed  dykin  of  wry"^  Rot  Watsoun  dykin  of  fleschoi's  ^^hiteit'L 
Jo°  Brounsyd  dykin    of    bonnetmakeris    and    M''  Ro'  AUassoun  dykin    of  tymecomeing. 
chyiurgenis   bieing   covenit   to   treit  consult   advys  and   coclud  anent   diuers 
pticularis  y'  concernithe  y"^  hospitall   and  pwir  y^'of  and  vtheris  efterspeit 
speciallie  anent  ye  wrang  and  great  cotempt  done  be  W™  Clogie  and    Jo° 
Chalmeris  y''  pfnt  pwir  intertineit  be  tham  w'in  the  said  hospitall  vpone  ye 
rentis  y^of  and  casualiteis  bielanging  yi^to  and  y*  be  devyding  of    the  said 
hospitall  zaird  and  setting  of  y^  ptis  y^of  by  the  craftis  knawledge  viz  the  said 
William  Clogie  his  p'  to  Rychard  Kirkland  and  ye  said  Jo°  Chalmeris  his  pt  to 
(  )  y''by  vsing  ye  sam  as  gif  the  said  zaird  wer  y^  awn 

pppef  albeit  ye  said  zaird  bielageth  to  ye  saidis  craftis  heritable  and  y^ 
successor's,  qlk  bieing  weyit  and  cosidderit  findis  the  said  W°*  and  Jo°  to  have 
done  manifest  wrang  and  great  cotempt  aganst  the  saidis  craftis.  Lykas  the 
said  W""  and  Jo°  Chalmeris  copeirit  and  cofest  ye  divisioun  and  sett  foresaid 
and  grantit  tham  to  have  done  wrang  in  doing  y^oi  for  ye  qlk  thay  ar  cum 
in  ye  craftis  will,  as  lykwayis  copeirit  ye  said  Rychard  Kirkland  and  grantit 
yt  he  had  done  WTang  in  taking  of  y'  p*  of  the  said  zaird  sett  to  him  be  the  said 
W"^  Clogie  and  y'"foir  of  his  awn  cosent  cum  in  ye  craftis  will  y^foir  and  frielie 
and  woluntarlie  of  his  awn  cosent  dimittit  q'sumever  ry'  possessioun  or  etres 
he  hes  or  can  pretend  y^^by  in  psoun  of  the  haill  body  of  the  said  craftis  renucing 
all  ryt  and  etres  yt  he  hes  or  can  pnd  y^to  in  fauo^s  of  the  said  dykin  cdveiner 
and  body  of  the  haill  craftis  and  y'  successors  for  ever.  For  ye  qlk  thair  cotempt 
and  wrang  done  ye  saidis  dykin  coveiner  and  craftis  secludis  the   said  W™ 


40 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [i6i2 


and  Jo°  fra  ony  p'  portioun  pffeit  or  comoditie  y*  thay  or  ony  of  tham  can  have 
of  the  said  zaird  for  this  zeir  to  cum  simpliciterhe  and  of  all  zeiris  to  cum 
during  ye  said  dykin  coveiner  and  craftis  will  and  inhibeitis  and  forbidis  yam 
to  mell  or  intromett  \v'  y'  saidis  ptis  of  the  said  zaird  or  ony  pffeit  or  comoditie 
y'  can  or  may  be  had  y'by  or  result  y^vpone.  As  lykwayis  the  said  dykin 
coveiner  and  craftis  having  weyit  ye  said  Rychard  his  p'  y^'of  of  y"'  awn 
beneuolence  and  guid  will  gifis  licence  and  tolleratis  the  said  Rychard  to 
posses  y*  p'  of  the  said  zaird  pntlie  possest  be  him  q"  Candilmes  nixt  to  cum 
but  payment  of  ony  dewtie  y'foir  he  removing  y''fra  at  ye  said  term  but  ony 
warnig  vnder  ye  pain  of  ane  hundry'  pund  and  finding  of  catioun  to  y'  effect 
for  ye  qlk  his  removing  at  the  said  term  of  Candilmes  W™  Kirkland  is  biecum 
actit  as  cationer  and  souertie  for  him  that  he  sail  remove  at  the  said  term 
but  ony  warning  vnder  ye  said  pain  of  ane  hundry'  pundis  and  he  to  releive 
his  said  cationer  yi^anent  the  said  Rychard  in  ye  meantym  hieing  watchfull 
alwayis  in  spying  of  ony  faltis  or  vther  enormiteis  it  sail  happin  the  pwir  of 
the  said  hospitall  to  comit  during  ye  tym  of  his  occupa'un  of  the  said  zaird 
and  y'  he  report  ye  sam  to  ye  dykin  coveiner  or  collecto'  for  ye  tyme  and 
ordanis  the  said  zaird  to  be  a  comoun  zaird  in  all  tym  ciiing. 

Ordanis  (  )  to  quhome  the  said  Jo°  Chalmeris  sett  his  p*  of 

the  said  zaird  to  be  warnit  to  copeir  Weddinsday  nixt. 


X  lib.  to 
Morsoun. 


Ordanis  Wm.  Stalker  pnt  collecto''  to  pay  to  Thoas  Morsoun  ten  ll  money 
as  for  his  chargis  ye  tym  he  read  last  to  Air  w'  ye  bischop. 


Bend  for  ye 

deikin 

conveiner. 


It  is  cocludit  be  ye  haill  body  of  craftis  that  y'  be  ane  bend  of  the  maist 
culie  fassioun  bocht  w'  ye  craftis  comoun  guidis  to  the  vse  of  him  quha  sail 
be  dykin  coveiner  for  the  tym  at  everie  wappinschawein  or  v''  comoun  publict 
schaw  as  it  sail  occur  and  the  samein  to  be  maid  and  rady  to  be  vsit  be  Ninian 
Andirsoun  pnt  dykin  coveiner  at  this  publict  wapinschawing  now  insewing. 


Ordanis  Ro'  Watsoun  dykin  of  flescho^s  to  pay  to  Simon  Baird  offi^ 
xiij  s.  iiij  d.  for  his  service  ye  zeir  of  God  1610  and  v''  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  for  his  service 
ye  zeir  of  God  161 1  zeiris  and  failzeing  y^'of  ordanis  him  to  be  poindit  y'foir. 


Prenties 
Home. 


Decimo  Sexto  die  Julij  1612. 

The  Qlk  Day  Ar"*  Home  wobster  prenteis  to  James  Graham  wobster  is 
imbuikit  in  ye  dykin  coveineris  bulk  as  prenteis  to  him  coform  to  y*  article 
contenit  in  ye  ler  of  gildrie  and  act  of  counsall  sett  doun  y'anent  to  ye  effect 
that  he  may  have  his  friedom  coforme  yi'to  and  be  virtew  of  indento'  past 
bietuix  tham  and  his  entrie  as  prenteis  qlk  is  of  ye  dait  ye  xvij  day  of  October 
1605  zeiris. 


i6i2]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


41 


Vi^esimo  seciindo  die  mensis  Julij  1612. 

The  Qlk   Day  Ninian  Andirsoun   dykin  coveiner   dykins  of  craftis  and  Vniaw  aganes 
breithering  of  his  counsall  bieing  covenit  anent  the  taking  of  ordC  w'  thais  chirurgiTnes 
q*  send  no'  doun  to  ye  weiding  of  Dumbuk  fuird  coform  as  thay  wer  warnit  and  wobsters. 
and  having  fund  y'  ye  craftis  efterspeit  send  no'  doun  ye  nuber  appointit  and 
ye  dykins  wnit  for  y'  effect  thay  and  everie  ane  of  tham  ar  decernit  in  vj  tl 
money  viz  the    hemirmen  for  sending  of  ane  and  sould  have  send  twa  the 
wobsteris  for  sending  of  ane  and  sould  have  send  twa  and  chyrurgenis  for 
sending  of  nain  and  thairfoir  thay  and  everie  ane  of  tham  ar  vnlawit  in  ye  said 
scum  of  sex  ll  money. 


Ordanis  the  collecto"'  \Vm.  Stalker  ( 


) 


Grantis  to  Simon  Baird  offr  ane  cleuk  to  be  coft  ather  of  gray  clathe  or  Ane  cieuk  to 
blak  and  blew  and  for  yis  effect  ordanis  ten  li  to  be  appointit  to  be  laid  on  the     ^"   ° 
taxt  y'  is  to  be  exactit  of  the  soum  sett  doun  to  be  warit   vpone  the  chargis 
of  Dumbuck  furd. 


Decimo  mensis  Octohris  1612. 

•  ■  The  Qlk  Day  Ninian  Andirsoun  dykin  coveiner  dykins  of  craftis  and  Fyve  persones 
breithering  of  his  counsall  covenit  for  electing  and  chusing  fo'  of  the  craftis  pa'rUament. 
rank  togidder  w'  ye  dykin  coveiner  to  ryd  to  Ed'  yf  to  attend  the  bischop 
the  tym  of  pliament  hes  be  pluralitie  of  vottis  electit  Walter  Dowglas  Thomas 
Morsoun  Jo°  Stirling  and  Gabriell  Listoun  togidder  w'  ye  said  dykin  coveiner 
to  ryd  to  Ed"'  for  ye  effect  foil  said  to  everie  ane  of  ye  quhilk  psonis  y''  is 
ordanit  to  be  allowit  ten  ll  extending  in  ye  haill  to  fyftie  li  to  be  exactit  p 
rata  of  everie  pticular  craft  as  eftir  follows  viz — 


Smeythis    . 

Tailzo's 

Cowpis 

Cordoneris 

Wobsteris 

Skinneris 

Wrychtis 

Baxteris 

Measonis 

Fleschoi^s 

Bonetmakeris 

Visitor 

Gairdneris 


iiij  ll 

vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

iij  li  XV  s. 

vj  ll  .xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

iij  li  .XV  s. 

iij  ll  XV  s. 

Is. 

xl  s. 

xls. 

iij  ll  .XV  s. 

x.xv  s. 

'   .  xll 

XX  s. 


42 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1612 


Layttis  for 
the  deikin 
conveiner. 


The  Qlk  Day  Ninian  Andirsoun  dykin  coveiner  and  dykins  of  craftis 
and  breitherein  of  his  counsall  hieing  coveinit  to  elect  and  chuis  twa  psonis 
of  the  craftis  rank  to  be  vpone  lytt  w'  the  said  dykin  coveiner  for  this  zeir 
to  cum  hes  be  plurahtie  of  vottis  electit  and  chosin  Thomas  Morsoun  and  Alex'' 
Calwall  to  be  on  lytis  w'  ye  auld  dykin  coveiner  y'  ane  of  tham  may  be  electit 
dykin  coveiner  for  yis  zeir  to  cum  and  ordanit  to  be  pntit  be  Jo°  Pedie  and 
\Vm  Howie  litster. 


Deikin 

coBveiniaris 

counsall. 


The  Qlk  Day  Thomas  Morsoun  dykin  coveiner  efter  delibera^un  had 
anent  thais  q^  ar  to  be  psones  of  his  counsall  for  this  zeir  to  cum  hes  nominal 
the  haill  dykins  viz  Jo°  Nep  dykin  of  smeythis  Jo°  Muir  dykin  of  tailzo's 
Gabriell  Listoun  dykin  of  cordoneris  Jo°  Pedie  dykin  of  skinneris  Jo"  Clerk 
dykin  of  wobsteris  Andro  Boyd  dykin  of  measouns  Ar"*  Reed  dykin  of  wry's 
James  Scheillis  dykin  of  cowpis  Ro'  Watsoun  dykin  of  fleschCs  Thomas 
Fawsyd  dykin  of  baxteris  Jo°  Brounsyd  dykin  of  bonnetmakeris  M""  Ro' 
Allassoun  dykin  of  chjTurgeinis  and  Jo°  Crawfurd  visito''  of  maltmen  and 
meilmen  togidder  w'  James  Braidwod,  baillie,  Ro'  Rowet  Jo°  Andirsoun 
Ninian  Andirsoun  Alex^  Calwall  Duncan  Sempill  Patrik  Maxwell  Gabriell 
Smy'  Jo°  Hall  James  Fyscher  Jo°  Stirling  Walter  Douglas  W""  Howie  Thomas 
Achisoun  W°i  Stalker  and  Thomas  Wylie  to  be  breitherein  of  his  counsall  for 
this  zeir  to  cum. 


1612    Duodecimo  Ociobris. 

Clerk.  The  Qlk  Day  M^  Alex''  Grahame  continowit  clerk  for  the  zeir  to  cum  hes 

givin  his  aithe  of  fidelitie  as  vse  is. 


Officer. 


Simon  Baird  continowit  offi''. 


Dean  of  gildis 
counsall. 


Mathow  Calmeroune  coUectour  of  ye  craftis  dewties  pteining  to  ye  craftis 
hospitall. 

The  Qlk  Day  the  said  deakin  conveiner  dykinis  of  craftis  and  remanent 
his  counsall  abouwrittin  being  convenit  to  elect  and  chuis  the  fo^  persounis 
of  ye  craftis  rank  to  be  wpon  ye  dean  of  gildis  counsall  for  yis  zeir  to  cum 
[conform]  to  that  article  coteinit  in  ye  letter  of  gildrie  set  doune  y'"anent  hes 
be  pluralitie  of  voties  electit  and  chosin  J  hone  Andirsoun  auld  bailzie  Ninian 
Andirsoun  William  Howie  Alex""  Cauldwell  to  be  wpon  ye  said  dean  of  gildis 
counsall. 

William  Stalkaris  compt  of  his  intromissioune  w'  ye  craftis 
dewties  charge  and  discharge  y^ol  as  collecto''  of  ye  same  fra  his 
etrie  qlk  wes  wpone  ye  xiij  day  of  November  iajvjc  11  wnto  ye  last 
electioune  of  ye  deakin  conveiner  qlk  is  ye  tyme  of  his  intromissioun. 


i6i2]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


43 


Charge. 

Item  ye  compter  charges  him  with  ye  craftis  new  rentell  qlk  extendis  to 

jcHj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  ye  craftis  auld  rentell  .  .  .  xxv)  li  ix  s.  iiij  d. 

Hew  Blairis  few  dewtie      .  .  .  .  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

J  hone  Dobbeis  few  dewtie  .  .  .  vj  1l  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Eufame  Wilsoune  .  .  .  .  .  vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  W  Roberts  few  dewtie  .  .  .  iiij  li  x  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  from  ye  Laird  of  Ernok  ye  Mtimes  terme  1611  and  Whitsounday  tme 

1612    ........         iiij^'^'li 

Item  fra  Jhone  Law  in  VVatterfit  and  his  pairtnieris  Mtimes  tme  1611  and 

WTiitsounday  161 1       ......        xxiiij  li 


Item  givin  be  vmq'i  Jhone  Will  qlk  1  persewit  for 
Item  from  Jhone  Pedie      .... 
Item  from  Jhone  Andirsoune  broy''  to  ye  dykin  coveiner 
W™  Nicoll  achten  sen  ye  last  zeir  of  God 


x  mkis. 

xl  s. 

XXX  s. 

iij  li  xj  s. 


Burgessis  yair  fyve  merkis  and  yc  sex  schilUngis  as  they  occiirrit  and 
delyverit  to  me  I  being  absent  at  ye  resat. 


Item  Jhone  Blair  maltman 

Item  from  Willia  Scott  in  Kairmyll 

Item  fra  Ro*  Bell  turnour 

Item  fra  Ro'  Sprewll 

Item  resavit  fra  Thomas  Morsoun 

Mair  fra  him  .... 

Item  fra  (  )  Widderspone  tailzo^ 

Item  Patrik  Lidgat 

Item  W™  Drumound 

Item  Gabriell  Allasoune     . 

Item  Jhone  Paslay 

Item  Jhone  Rase  being  both  burges  and  gild 

Item  Andro  Fynlay 

Summa  of  the  chargis  extendis  to 


iij  li  vij  s.  viij  d. 

iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

iij  ll  vj  s 

iij  li  vj  s 

iij  ll  vj  s 


( 


viij  d. 
viij  d. 
viij  d. 

vj  s. 

vj  s. 

vj  s. 

vj  s. 

vj  s. 

vjs. 

xj  s. 

vj  s. 

) 


The  Compteris  discharge. 

Item  to  M""  Jhone  Howiesoune  for  ye  Mtimes  161 1  and  Whitsounday  tme 

j<=xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  ye  men  of  ye  almoushous  y""  zeirlie  dewtie  payit  extendis  to 

iij '"'xiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  for  fowr  ell  and  ane  half  of  blew  claythe  to  be  ane  gowne  to  Jhon  Glen 

pwir  man  of  ye  hospitall  pryce  of  ye  ell  xxxiij  s.  iiij  d.     Siima  vij  li.  xij  s. 

The  making  y^of    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  xij  s. 


44  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1612 

Item  furneisit  to  ye  hospitall  thrie  dosan  twa  laidis.      Suma  y'of  extendis  to 

X)  li  xviij  s. 

Item  of  peittis  ane  dosan  and  sevin  laid  sen  ye  last  electioune  y^oi.     Suma 

y^of    .......  iiij  li  viij  d. 

Item  for  M"'  Jo°  Howiesounes  disjune  and  denner  twa  sindrie  dayis  togidder 

with  thais  of  ve  crafts  rak  quha  vves  in  company  with  him         iiij  "li  x  s. 

Item  to  Walter  Dowglas  conforme  to  ane  act         .  .  .  xx  li 

Item  to  Gabriell  Smyth  coforme  to  ane  act  .  .  .  v  ll 

Item  to  Simon  Baird  for  twa  pair  of  schone  .  .  .        xlviij  s. 

Item  givin  to  Mr  Allex''  Grahame  for  his  fey  .  vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  ye  wyne  givin  to  ye  comiss^  clerk  q°  I  extractit  ye  decreit  pronucit 

aganes  hir  as  execute  to  wmqll  Jhon  Will  hir  husband  for  ye  sowme  in 

charge  givin  be  him  to  ye  almoushous  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Mair  to  ye  executor's  of  ye  sumoundis  ane  choppein  of  wyne  at         .         iiij  s. 

Item  at  ye  directioune  of  James  Braidwood  baillie  to  M''  Jo°  Howiesownes 

hows  at  Cabuslang  ane  quart  of  wyne  seek  at  .  .       xxxvj  s. 

With  ane  quart  of  Frainche  wyne  ....  xvj  s. 

Togidder  with  ane  half  peck  of  flour  fynhe  baikin  withe  buttir  at  xx  s. 

Item  givin  to  Mathow  Fyscher  for  charging  and  denuceing  ye  Laird  of  Ernok 

Iiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  givin  to  George  Scott  for  ye  velvet  mortclay'  to  lay  wpon  M'  Jhone 

Howiesownis  wyfe       ......  iiij  li 

Item  givin  to  James  Lennox  ane  of  ye  bak  almoushous  men  at  ye  comand  of 

James  Braidwod  and  deakin  conveiner  .  .  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  givin  for  ane  quart  of  wyne  seek  and  ane  quart  of  quhyt  wyne  togidder 

w*  ane  quart  of  graives  wyne  and  twa  bwytis  of  comfeitis  tain  up  to  M'' 

Jo"  Howiesownes  hous   quhan   Mathow  TrGble   and   James    Braidwood 

bailleis  raid  bidder  for  ye  weill  of  the  hospitall.    Siima  of  ye  haill  iiij  li  x  s. 

Item  mair  givin  to  ye  said  James  Lennox  .  .  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  givin  for  ane  hors  to  myself  at  fowr  severall  tymes    q°    I  raid  wp    to 

Cambuslang  for  ye  hospitall  affairis  for  ye  said  M''  Jhone  p'lie  riddin  with 

ye  said  baillie  and  p'lie  be  myself  alaine  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Item  for  saxtein  laid  of  lyme  to  spargroun  ye  almoushous  w'  p'lie  bocht  from 

our  awin  killis  and  ye  leiding  y^oi  bieing  payit  and  p'lie  from  Kilbryde 

vj  li  xij  s.  viij  d. 
Item  for  twa  dosan  of  sand  .....        xlviij  s. 

Item  givin  for  ye  decreit  of  ye  twa  bedis  of  ye  bak  almoushous  to  Ai^  Heygait 

xx.x  s. 

To  M'  Alex''  Grahame  for  forming  and  wryting     .  .  .  x  s. 

Item  givin  to  David  Pollok  drumer  at  directioun  of  ye  dykin  convenier   xliiij  s. 

Item  givin  for  fowr  stoine  and  nyne  pund  of  irne  to  be  staincheo''s  to  ye  hospitall 

windowes  ye  stoine  y^of  at  fowrtie  twa  schillingis  ye  stoine     Siima 

ix  H  xj  s.  vj  d. 


i6i3]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  45 

For  warkmaschip  y^oi        .  .  .  .  .  .  Is. 

For  leid  and  wpputting  of  ye  same  ....  xxij  s. 

Item  givin  to  Simon  Baird  for  clay'  to  be  ane  clook  coforme  to  ane  act       x  li 
Item  givin   to  Mathow  Calmeroun  for  ye  zeiris  service         iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d.   ' 
Item  for  ane  pynt  of  wyne  drukin  w'  ye  Laird  of  Ernock  .  viij  s. 

Item  ye  nonpaymentis  of  ye  auld  rentell  q'w'  I  have  chargit  myself  togidder 

w'  ten  s.  in  Elizabeth  Arbukillis  hands  onpayit  iij  li  xiiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  zo^seall  qlk  wes  maid  at  command  of  ye  dykin  coveiner  vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Charge  and  discharge  hard  and  allowit  y''  restis  in  ye  copteris  handis  xj-  li 

iiij  s.  allowit  to  him  for  his  panes. 

The  Qlk  Day  it  is  ordainit  be  the  deakin  coveinar  and  haill  deakinis  of 
craftis  and  brethering  of  his  counsall  that  Jo°  Landes  baxter  be  ane  ordinair 
in  the  almoushous. 

Vigesimo  Sexto  Marti j  1613. 

The  Qlk  Day  Jhone  Howie  cowpper  prenteis  to  Robert  Howie  is  imbwikit 
in  ye  deakin  conveineris  bwik  as  prenteis  to  him  coforme  to  that  article 
conteinit  in  ye  Ire  of  gildrie  and  act  of  counsall  set  doune  y^'anent  to  ye  effect 
that  he  may  have  his  fredome  coforme  y'to  be  virtew  of  indentour  past  betwix 
thame  and  his  entrie  as  prenteis  qlk  is  of  ye  dait  ye  xxvj  day  of  Martche  1613 
zeiris. 

Sexio  Octobris  1613. 

The  qlk  day  in  pns  of  ye  deacone  conveiner  his  counsell  and  deacones  Huchesoun 
convenit  for  ye  tvme  in  ye  Blakfreir  Kirk  Thomas  Morsoun  deacone  conveinar  '^'f '^.... 
tuik  ye  aith  of  M''  Jo"  Huchesoun  not  q"^  he  and  his  counsell  and  deacones 
chuse  to  be  dark  to  yame  that  he  sould  be  leill  and  trew  and  exerce  ye  office 
of  ane  dark  to  yame  in  tyme  ciiing. 

Memo'^     Nono  August]  1613. 

The  qlk  day  at  comand  of  ye  deacone  conveiner  Ar<i  Pollok  skynner  q*  pniiok  buikit 
servit  out  his  printeischip  w'  Alex''  Cauldwal  skyner  and  zeiris  y'efter  conforme  'J  ^'^  ',"^- 
to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie  is  ordanet  to  be  buiket  in  ye  deacone  conveinars  buik  article  is 
and  on  testimoniall  to  be  gratit  y'  he  is  worth  ye  sowme  contenit  in  ye  lettir  jro^sTerior 
of  gildrie  to  ye  dea  of  gild  to  ye  effect  he  may  be  ressavit  burges  and  friema  '""^^."^  °^  ve 
w'  his  craft  payand  y''foir  as  effeirs  conforme  to  ye  article  contenit  in  ye  lettir  ye  said  Ar' 

e     -1  1   •  i^ow  bukit. 

of  gildrie. 

Sexto  Octobris  1613. 

The  qlk  day  Thomas  Morsoun  deacone  conveiner  remanent  deacones  of  Lyttis 
yis  burghe  and  brethering  of  his  counsell  being  convenit  in  ye  Blakfreir  Kirk  ca^uidwarw"^ 
for  electing  and  chuising  of  twa  psounes  ye  best  and  worthiest  to  be  lyttit  w'  ye  auld  deacon 
ye  said  auld  deacone  of  ye  rank  of  craftismen  to  be  presentit  to  ye  proveist  to  be  presentit 
bailleis  and  counsell  that  ane  of  ye  thrie  may  be  chosin  to  be  deacone  conveinar  '°  ^'^  '^o""^^^"- 


45 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1613 


Dauid 

Montgomerie 
buikit  to  be 
maid  burges 
and  gild  broy'. 


Patrik 
Maxuall 
deacoit 
conveyner  his 
counsell 
electit  w'  ye 
dean  of  gilds 
counsell. 


Keyis  of  ye 
box  keipar. 

Act  that  all 
printeiss  be 
first  buikit 
heirin  befoir 
yai  be  buikit 
in  yaif  avvin 
deacone  of 
craftis  book. 


for  yis  zeir  to  cum  the  haill  auld  and  new  deacounes  electit  for  yis  zeir  to  cu 

and  ye  deacone  conveinars  counsell  being  removit  in  sax  seuerall  companeis 
of  sax  togidder  first  ane  prevaillit  be  pluralitie  of  voittis  out  of  ilk  sax  q^  being 
removit  all  sa.x  togidder  being  voittit  qlk  twa  of  the  sax  was  to  be  preferrit 
Patrik  Maxuall  and  Alex''  Caulwall  is  ordanet  to  be  put  on  lytt  w'  ye  auld 
generall  deacone  be  pluralitie  of  voittis  and  ordanet  to  be  presentit  be  twa 
of  the  deacones  sik  as  ye  deacone  conveinar  sail  appointt  to  ye  proueist  bailleis 
and  counsel!  as  said  is  that  ane  of  yame  may  be  electit  deaco  conveinar  for  ye 
zeir  to  cu  conforme  to  y*  article  contenit  in  ye  lettir  of  gildrie. 

XV  Octobris  1613. 

This  day  Dauid  Montgomerie  coup  is  ordait  be  ye  deacone  conveinar  to 
be  buikit  in  yis  his  buik  as  ane  craftisma  q*  servit  James  Ritchie  coup  conforme 
to  ye  lettir  of  gUdrie  and  is  worthe  the  sowm  of  frie  geir  contenit  y^intill  to  ye 
effect  he  may  be  maid  burges  gildbroy  and  friema  payand  y^foir  as  effeirs. 

Vigesimo  die  mensis  Octobris  1613. 

This  day  Patrik  Maxuall  now  deaco  conveinar  electit  be  ye  proveist 
bailleis  counsell  and  deacones  for  yis  zeir  to  cii  being  convenit  w'  ye  rest  of  ye 
deacones  in  ye  counselhous  for  electing  of  his  awn  counsell  and  four  persounes 
of  ye  meittest  of  ye  rak  of  craftismen  to  be  on  ye  dean  of  gUds  counsell  for  yis 
zeir  to  cu  first  he  nominat  and  appointtit  to  be  on  his  awn  counsell  the  haill 
deacones  and  visito''  of  maltme  and  meilmen  viz  James  Rowatt  W™  Heriott 
Jo°  Myller  Mungo  HamOtoun  Patrik  Bard  James  Scheills  W""  Neilsoun  George 
Scherelaw  James  Reid  J01  Hall  chyrurgia  George  Brum  Jo"  Steuart  Jo° 
Smythe  new  deacones  togidder  w'  Jo°  Andersoun,  baillie,  Ro'  Rowatt  James 
Braidwod  Dunca  Sempill  Ninia  Andersoun  Thoas  Morsoune  James  Fischer 
Waltir  Douglas  Alex"^  Cauldwell  Jo°  Padie  Jo°  Hall  coup  Thomas  Achissoun 
W™  Howie  Thomas  Fawsyde  Jo°  Mwr  Thomas  Wylie  and  Gabriell  Listoun 
W™  Stalcher  Jo^  Stirling  and  siclyke  out  of  ye  foirsaids  psounes  abouwrittin 
removit  in  aucht  persounes  togidder  be  voitt  Rob*  Rowatt  James  Braidwod 
auld  baOleis  Ninia  Andirsoun  and  Thomas  Morsoun  auld  deacone  conveinars 
ar  nominat  and  appointtit  to  be  on  ye  dea  of  gilds  counsell  for  yis  zeir  to  cum 
to  be  presentit  be  ye  deacone  conveinar  to  ye  dean  of  gOd  to  ye  effect  foirsaid. 
Lykeas  ye  deacone  conveinars  haill  counsellor's  nominat  abouewrittin  gave  y 
aithis  of  fidelitie  as  vse  is.  Lykeas  W™  Neilsoun  W™  Howie  James  Rowatt 
ilk  ane  of  ya  ressavit  ane  key  of  ye  box  to  be  produce  be  ya  at  ye  nixt  electioun 
qi  yis  zeir  expyiis  conforme  to  ye  ordo''. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  conveinar  deacones  and  remanent  of  his  counsell 
abouewrittin  being  convenit  as  said  is  all  in  ane  voice  but  variance  hailing 
tane  consideratioun  q'  incoveinec  and  hurt  fallis  furthe  throw  not  bulking  of 
ye  haill  printeiss  tane  in  be  ye  haill  craftis  and  y  assistaris  in  yis  his  buik  in 


i6r3]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  47 

respect  of  y'  article  contenit  in  ye  lettir  of  gildrie  that  nane  aucht  to  be  ressavit 
to  be  ane  burges  of  the  rak  of  craftismen  and  y  assistaris  w^out  his  vvarrand 
to  ye  deane  of  gild  and  he  ca  gif  na  warrand  without  yai  all  be  buikit  as  said  is 
q*  craifis  his  warrand  and  serve  conforme  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie.  Thairfoir  ye 
said  deacone  convcinar  deacones  and  counsell  abouenamet  in  ane  voice  and 
w'  ane  consent  statute  and  ordanet  that  ye  haill  printeiss  beis  ressauit  be  ye 
haill  craftismen  and  y  assistars  w'in  yis  burghe  in  tyme  ciiing  sail  be  first 
buiket  in  ye  deacone  conveinaris  buik  and  ane  warrand  of  his  dark  y^'of  to  ye 
deacone  of  craft  q^  is  to  buik  ye  printeis  befoir  he  be  ressauit  or  buiket  in  ye 
deaco  of  his  callingis  buik  qtsumever  to  eschew  ye  former  dainger  and  in  cais 
ony  of  ye  deacones  q*sumever  and  y  assistaris  ressave  or  suffer  ony  printeis 
be  ressauit  be  ony  of  ye  craftis  or  y  assistaris  be  first  buiket  in  y  awin  craftis 
buik  befoir  he  be  first  buiket  in  ye  deaco  conveinars  buik  as  said  is,  in  y*  cais 
the  deacone  of  craft  w^  q™  yai  ar  buikit  to  pay  fywe  punds  money  for  ilk 
printeis  yai  ressaue  toties  quoties  yai  contravein  to  the  deacon  conveinar  to 
be  tane  vp  and  convertit  ad  pios  vsus  and  siclyke  that  nane  of  ye  deacones 
visito''  nor  y  assistars  ressaue  ony  friema  w'  yame  befoir  he  be  first  buikit  in 
yis  ye  deacone  conveinars  buik  and  ye  clarks  testificat  to  ye  deaco  q*sumeuer 
y'of  vnder  ye  said  paine  toties  quoties  for  ilk  psoune  happinis  to  be  ressauit 
in  all  tyme  cuing  and  siclyke  that  ye  haill  printeiss  ar  not  as  zit  buikit  be 
buikit  to  eschew  ye  former  dainger  and  euerie  deacone  to  mak  intimatioun 
to  y  haill  craftis  of  ye  samy  vy''wayes  the  printeiss  sail  haue  na  benefeit  be  y 
printeischip  conforme  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie  and  yt  article  y''of  and  ilk  deaco 
is  ordanet  to  extract  yis  present  act  to  be  buikit  in  his  buike  that  nane  pfd 
ignorance  y^of. 

xxvii  Ociobris  1613. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacone  conveyner  deacounes  of  craft  and  maist  p*  of  y  Thomas 
counsell  being  convenit  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  for  heiring  of  Thomas  Morsounes  co^pt"fra 
last  deacone  conveyners  compt  of  his  intromissioun  w'  ye  craftis  rentell  and  Michaeimes 
vy  small  pticulars  of  burgess  entereis  the  said  Thomas  chairget  himself  w'  Michaeimes 
ye  new  rentell  fra  Michaeimes  1612  to  Michaeimes  last  was  extending  to  thrie  ^^^^' 
hundrethe  thrie  scoir  fyve  punds  xiij  s.  and  als  chairget  himself  w*  ye  fyve 
mks  and  vj  s.  payit  be  ye  enterie  of  burgess  ye  said  space  extending  to  twentie 
sax  pund  ten  schilling  viij  d.  his  haill  chairge  extending  to  thrie  hundrethe 
four  scoir  twelf  pund  iij  s.  viij  d.  and  dischairget  himself  w'  ye  sowmes  debursit 
be  him  in  ye  craftis  adois  necessar  allowet  be  ye  deacones  extending  conforme 
to  his  particular  compt  to  thrie  hundrethe  thrie  scoir  aucht  pund  viij  s.  viij  d., 
sua  restis  w*  ye  comptar  xxiij  I1  xv  s.  q^'of  [there  is]  ordanet  to  be  gevin  to 
Ninian  Andersoun  v  li  iij  s.  viij  d.     Sua  restis  on  ye  comptar  xviij  ti  xj  s.  iiij  d. 
And  als  ye  comptar  chairges  himself  w'  ye  pticular  anuells  in  ye  rolmount 
gevin  to  ye  craftis  be  ye  burghe  qlk  appertenit  to  ye  twa  beddis  of  ye  bak 
almoushous  of  ye  tme  of  Mtimes  1612  and  Witsounday  tme  1613  extending 


48 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1613 


Calmeroun 
officiar. 


Ordinance 

about 

Wilsoun. 


PriDteis 
Dobbie. 


Wrang  Glen. 


Printeis 
Woddrope. 


Printeis 
Steuart. 


Brownsyde  in 
ye  wrang. 


to  ten  pund  viij  s.  viij  d.  to  be  gottin  in  be  Matho  Calmeroun  conforme  to  ye 
rolmount  q^oi  his  haUl  chairge  is  in  his  hands  extends  to  twentie  nyne  punds 
qlk  being  payet  to  ye  deacone  convej'ner  and  deacones  thej'  exoner  and  simpli 
discharges  the  said  Thomas  Morsoun  of  his  intromissioun  abouewrittin  the 
space  abouespeit  be  yir  pntis  foreuer  conforme  to  his  compt  gevin  out  to  him 
y'anent  subscryuit  be  ye  dark  q^vpone  ye  said  Thomas  tuik  instfnts. 

The  said  da\-  Matho  Calmeroun  offi''  is  chosin  for  the  zear  to  cu  (  ) 

Symone  Baird  q*  maid  faith  to  serwe  deulie  ye  craftis  and  to  keip  counsell. 

The  said  day  ye  deacone  convenar  is  ordanet  to  pay  xx  s.  to  Margrat 
Wilsoun  spous  to  Andro  Hervie  for  Jo°  Glen  and  Joi  Landells  of  (  ) 

of  yair  deuteis  appointtit  for  y  sustenta~un  for  meit  and  drink  furneischt  be 
hir  to  yame. 

The  said  day  W"  Dobbie  is  buiket  as  he  q*  is  prenteis  to  W™  Gib  wobster 
be  his  indentof  of  ye  dait  ye  fyft  day  of  De^  1606  zeiris  q^  enterit  yi'at  and  bund 
to  serwe  sevin  zeiris  coforme  yi'to. 

The  said  day  Jo"  Glen  fund  in  ane  fait  for  passing  out  of  ye  hospitall 
and  di  inking  in  ye  toun  diuers  tymes. 

The  said  day  Ro'  \\'oddrope  printeis  to  Jo"  Scott  zounger  loiimer  buikit 
heirin  conforme  to  ye  laitt  act  be  his  indento'  of  ye  dait  the  (  )  day 

of(  ).     " 

The  said  day  Johne  Steuart  sone  lau"  to  vmq'^  Waltir  Steuart  masoune 
burges  of  yis  bur*  of  Glasgw  is  buikit  as  ane  printeis  to  Jhone  Steuart  deaco 
of  the  masounes  to  serwe  fra  yis  day  furthe  conform  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie. 

Tertio  No''s  1613. 
The  said  day  in  ane  complaint  gevin  in  be  Johne  Smythe  pnt  deacone  of 
ye  bonetmakeris  and  his  breying  of  craft  and  mi's  yi'of  befoir  ye  deacone 
convey ner  and  ye  maist  pairt  of  ye  deacounes  convenit  in  ye  New  Kirk  aganes 
Johne  Brounsyde  last  deaco  for  injuring  of  the  deacoe  and  w*halding  of  y 
craftis  ben  and  garttaines  the  said  Johne  pnt  was  contet  to  be  tryet  and  juget 
be  ye  deacones  anent  ye  said  complaint  and  eftir  dew  tryell  be  ye  depositiounes 
of  ye  m^'s  and  honest  me  of  craft  vpoun  y  aithe  the  deaco  convejmer  and 
deacones  fand  ye  said  Jo"  in  ye  wTang  and  y^iok  decernit  and  ordanet  the 
said  Jo"  Smythe  and  his  mi's  of  craft  to  be  frie  and  fred  of  sevin  punds  money 
qlk  yai  war  auchtane  to  him  in  of  his  comptis  for  ye  qlk  he  detenit  the  ben 
and  gartanes  and  ordaet  yame  to  pay  fywe  mkis  y'"of  to  ye  weill  of  ye  craftis 
hospitall  as  ye  deacones  appointtis  vj  s.  viij  d.  to  Symone  Baird  offi"'  and  ye 
rest  to  yameselfs  as  ane  penaltie  for  his  wrang  and  to  ask  the  deaco  and  m's 
of  craft  forgivenes  for  his  injurie  to  yame  q'vpoun  ye  deacoe  askit  actis. 


i6i3]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  49 

Octauo  No's  1613. 

The  said  day  Johne  Gibsoune  sone  lau"  to  Thomas  Gibsoun  in  Ryzairds  Printeis 
is  buikit  as  prenteis  to  James  Bar  cordoner  burges  of  Glasgw  conforme  to  his  '  ^°""' 
indento'  of  ye  dait  of  yir  pntis  to  serwe  conforme  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie. 

xvij  No's  1613. 

The  said  day  Alex'  Adame  sone  to  Dauid  Ada  mcheat  burges  of  Glasgw  Adam« 
is  buikit  printeis  to  Johne  Schanks  tailzeo'  burges  y'of  be  his  indento'  of  ye 
dait  ye  xiij  day  of  No''  instat  bund  sevin  zeir. 


printeis. 


The  said  day  Af  Myller  sone  to  Johne  Myller  deaco  of  ye  tailzeoJ's  is  Myiier 
buiket  printeis  to  Ro'  Makure  tailzeo"'  q%  enterie  was  at  Witsounday  last  ^""  "^' 
conforme  to  ye  indento''. 

Sexto  De's  1613. 

The  said  day  Johne  Howie  sone  lau"  to  %'mqle  Dauid  Howie  litsf  is  buiket  Howie 
printeis  to  Jo"  Imbrie  cordoner  conforme  to  his  indento'  q*  enterit    to  be  ''""  "^' 
printeis  ye  xvj  day  of  Sep'  1612  zeirs  to  serwe  conforme  to  ye  gildrie. 

Octatio  De's  1613. 

The  qlk  day  the  deaco  conveyner  deacones  and  y  counsell  being  conveynit  Obsoivito' 
in  ye  craftis  hospitall  for  heiring  of  certa  contraverseis  greifis  and  complaints  vy^'^wrichts. 
gevin  in  be  James  Reid  deaco  of  ye  wrichtis  and  his  complices  and  m''s  of 
craft  aganis  Alex''  Mayne  and  Ro'  Mure  and  be  yame  James  Mayne  and  y 
complices  aganis  ye  deaco  Ar**  Reid  James  Allasoun  and  vy's  of  y  associattis 
the  said  Alex''  Ma^'ne  and  Ro*  Mure  being  complenit  vpoun  about  y  last  quarter 
conventioun  that  yai  being  present  and  requyrit  for  y  quarter  compt  they  as 
was  alle'  maliceouslie  in  face  of  court  said  devill  ane  penny  they  wald  pay  and 
y'  yai  war  nane  present  wordie  to  ressaue  ye  samy  saying  that  ye  haill  comoun 
guidis  of  y  craft  was  wirreit  vp  be  thrie  or  four  in  hoills  by  ye  restis  consentis 
as  at  m''  lenth  is  contenit  in  ye  said  deaco  bills  gevin  in  befoir  ye  deacones 
y'anent  qlk  complaint  he  referrit  simpli  to  y  aithis  and  quha  being  suorne 
be  y  aithis  denyet  ye  said  clame  and  complaint  simpli  and  y''foir  ye  said  deac6 
conveyner  and  deacones  assoilzeit  yame  y''fra  q''vpoun  yai  askit  actis. 

The  said  day  James  Mayne  wricht  be  pluralitie  of  voittis  is  ordanet  to  be  Mayne 
ressauit  be  ve  said  Tames  Reid  deacone  to  be  ane  maister  of  v  craft  to  Michaelmes  "■''^^"^f  t° '"' 

J  J  J  ressauit  ane 

nixt  to  cum  becaus  it  was  cleirlie  vnderstude  to  yame  that  he  was  on  ye  lyttis  m'  of  craft, 
to  be  deacone  at  ye  last  electioun  and  gat  sinderie  voittis  of  ye  craft  being  ane 
honest  ma  of  y'  craft. 


The  said  day  anent  VV""  Selkrig  pairt  of  ye  complaint  aganis  ye  deacone  Seikrig  to 

mak  a 
essay. 


being  hard  that  he  and  his  m's  of  craft  wald  not  ressaue  him  he  haifing  maid  ™^''  ^°*  ''*" 


50 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1613 


Ordeance 
about  ye 
deacone  of 
ye  wrichts. 


Wrang  Scott. 


his  say  conforme  to  ye  ordo''  and  lettir  of  deacorie  the  deaco  conveyner  deacones 
and  counsell  ordanet  his  essay  to  be  sicht  be  Ro*  Pettigrew  Patrik  Colquhoun 
Ro'  Bell  and  Ar''  Reid  and  be  Thomas  Morsoun  and  W™  NeOsoun  as  ouersme 
to  tham  and  in  cais  it  be  not  fund  sufhciet  to  mak  j'e  samy  ouer  againe  and  to 
reporte  to  ye  deaco  coveyner  j''"anent. 

The  said  day  it  is  ordanet  be  ye  deaco  coveyner  deacones  and  counsell 
convenit  for  ye  ty  that  y  sail  be  sax  persounes  of  ye  honest  men  and  worthiest 
of  ye  craft  chosin  equallie  be  ye  deaco  and  m^s  of  ye  vvricht  craft  to  heir  and 
sie  ye  deacounes  compt  zeirlie  maid  and  to  be  present  y'at  that  yai  may  sie 
ye  craftis  geir  put  to  ane  guid  weill  and  best  proffeit  for  ye  craft  and  y'  w'  ye 
said  deacone  and  mi's. 

The  said  day  George  Scott  is  fund  in  ye  wrang  for  miscalling  of  Ada 
Elphenstoun  in  calling  him  mainsuorne  in  face  of  court  q^'  of  his  awin  consent 
become  in  ye  deco  conveyners  will  for  his  wrang. 


Artho' 
printeis. 


xxini  DCs  1 61 3. 

The  said  day  Ro*  Artho"'  sone  to  vonqle  James  Artho^  in  Fergustoun  is 
inbuiket  as  printeis  to  Johne  Mitchell  tailzeo'  in  the  Briggait  as  he  q'''  enterit 
on  ye  saxt  day  of  Maij  last  to  serwe  printeis  w*  him  conforme  to  ye  act  of 
gUdrie  viz  vij  zeir  printeis  and  twa  zeir  for  meitt  and  fie  conforme  to  y  indentor 
daittit  ye  said  saxt  day  of  Maij  1613. 


Hunter 
printeis. 


Neilsone 
printeis. 


Claud  SpreuU 
to  be  burges 
and  frieman. 


Eod  die. 

Johne  Hunter  sone  to  ]o°  Hunter  indueller  in  Glasgw  is  buiket  in  yis  ye 
deaco  conveyners  bulk  as  prenteis  to  Jod  Rakein  masoun  burges  of  yis  bur* 
as  he  q^  enterit  to  him  at  Beltane  jajvic  twelf  zears  to  serwe  printeis  conforme 
to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie  and  act  maid  y^'anent  Jo°  Steuart  deacone  being  present 
w'  ye  said  Johne  Rankein  his  maister. 

The  said  day  George  Neilsoun  sone  to  vmqle  Thomas  Neilsoun  printeis 

to Cliddisdaill  wobst  as  he  q*  enterit  at  Mtimes  1608  be  his 

indento^  of  ye  dait  ye  xxv  of  October  1608  to  serwe  ye  space  of  sewin  zeiris 
buikit  in  respect  of  ye  last  act  and  ordinace  maid  yi'anent  the  xxvij  of  .  .  . 
1613. 

xxiif  Martij  1614. 

The  said  day  Claud  Spreull  coup  is  ordanet  to  be  buiket  in  yis  ye  deacone 
conveyners  buik  as  he  q^  seruit  out  his  printeischip  w'  vmqle  George  Scott 
coup  burges  of  yis  burghe  to  ye  effect  he  may  haue  ye  deacone  convenars 
warrand  to  ye  deane  of  gild  to  be  maid  burges  and  friema  payand  y'^iok  as 
effeirs. 


i6i4]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  51 

xxviij,  Aprilis  1614. 
The  said  day  James  Cauldwell  cordoner  is  ordanet  to  be  buiket  as  he  q*  Cauidweii  to 
hes  mareit  Af  Patirsoune  vvobst  ane  gild  broyrs  dochtir  and  ane  testificat  to  beburges. 
be  gevin  to  ye  deane  of  gild  be  ye  deacone  conveyner  that  he  may  be  ressauit 
burges  and  gild  broy  payand  y'foir  as  effeirs. 

The  said  day  Dauid  Cauldwell  cordoner  is  ordanet  to  be  buiket  as  q^  Cauidwells 
servit  out  his  prenteischip  and  seruice  conforme  to  ye  gildrie  vv'  vmqle  Johne  1^^"^"^ '" 
Listoun  cordoner  to  ye  effect  he  may  haue  ane  warrand  of  ye  deacone  con- 
veyner  to  be  ressauit  burges. 

Quarto  Maij  1614. 
The  said  day  Johne  Blair  sone  to  Alex^  Blair  mcheant  burges  of  Glasgw  Printeis  jo' 
is  buiket  printeis  to  Matho  Falconer  tailzeo^  burges  of  yis  burghe  to  serue 
during  ye  tyme  and  space  mentionat  in  ye  lettir  of  gildrie  conforme  to  his 
indentor  of  ye  dait  heirof. 

Eoct  die. 
Rot  Steuart  sone  to  VV"  Steuart  in  Paslay  is  buiket  printeis  to  Johne  Printeis 
Mitchell  tailzeo""  burges  of  yis  burghe  to  serue  conforme  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie 
and  his  indento''  sett  doune  y''anent  vpoun  ye  xxj  day  of  Mche  1614. 


Blair. 


Steuart. 


xxiiij  Junij  1614. 
The  said  day  Dauid  Watsoune  is  buiket  printeis  to  Johne  Clark  wobst  Printeis 
burges  of  yis  burghe  as  he  q*  enterit  to  his  printeischip  at  Witsounday  in  anno  ^^'^'^°""- 
1608  zeirs  be  indento''  of  ye  dait  ye  xxvij  day  of  Apryle  ye  said  zeir  conforme 
to  ye  act  and  ordinance  sett  doun  that  all  prenteis  may  be  buiket  no'w'standing 
yai  war  not  buiket  heirin  at  y  enteric  sett  doun  on  ye  last  of  October  1613. 

Memorandum   yir  ordenances   following   war    not   buiket   in   y'' 
awin  rowme  being  writtin  in  paper  at  ye  first. 

xvj  Marche  1614. 
The  said  day  Matho  Calmeroun  is  ordanet  to  poynd  ye  deacounes  for  y  caimereoun 
quarter  comptis  sa  mony  as  hes  not  payet  and  satifie  y'foir  betuix  and  ye  nixt  or^awet  to 
conventioun.  compts. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  conveyner  deacones  and  counsell  being  convenit  Discharge 
in  ye  craftis  hospitall  hes  exonerit  and  dischairget  and  be  yir  pntis  exoners  ^'°'^=°"°«'- 
and  simpll  dischairges  Thomas  Morsoun  last  deaconveyner  and  Matho 
Calmeroun  his  offi''  of  ye  sowme  of  tuentie  nyne  punds  restit  in  his  hands  at 
his  compt  making  of  his  intromissioun  w'  ye  haill  rent  of  y  hospitall  fra 
Michaelmes  1612  to  Michaelmes  jajvjc  threttein  zeirs  last  by  past  becaus  he 
hes  maid  compt  and  payment  y^ol  to  ye  present  deacone  conveyner  q'"'  wilbe 
comptable  y^foir. 


52 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1614 


Ordnance  for  The  Said  day  the  deacone  conveyner  deacones  and  y  counsel!  hes  ordanet 

DakitifpiU.       fourtie  schilling  to  be  gevin  to  Symone  Baird  to  heipe  him  by  his  quarter 
waiges  and  vy  xl  s.  to  Jo°  Dalripill  of  ye  craftis  hospitalls  rent. 


Printeis 
Coitts. 


The  said  day  William  Coittis  is  buiket  as  printeis  to  Mungo  Hamiltoun 
cordoner  as  he  q*  enterit  to  him  be  his  indento''  maid  vpoun  ye  xxv  day  of 
Deceber  1612  zeirs  to  serwe  conforme  to  ye  gildrie. 


Printeis 
Imbrie. 


Printeis 
Sommer 


Burges 
Galbraithe. 


xxiiij  Jtinij  1614. 

The  said  day  James  Imbrie  sone  to  Ro*  Imbrie  buikit  heirin  as  printeis 
to  W™  Watsoun  flescheo"'  to  serve  him  sewin  zeir  be  his  indento''  daittit  the 
fourt  of  Apryle  1614. 

The  said  day  James  Somer  is  buiket  printeis  to  Jo°  Brysoune  cordoner 
as  he  q*  enterit  to  him  (  ). 

The  said  day  Johne  Galbraithe  sone  to  George  Galbraithe  tailzeo''  burges 
of  Glasgw  buiket  heirin  to  ye  effect  he  may  be  maid  burges  q*  hes  ressauit 
ye  deacone  convenars  warrand  to  ye  dea  of  gild  to  y*  effect. 


Secundo  Septembris  1614. 

Ordanance  The  Said  day  the  deacone  conveyner  deacones  and  counsell  being  convenit 

Siyehopiun"  ^or  Y^  tyme  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  they  statute  and  ordane  that  ye  pure  q*  ar 
sustenit  be  ya  in  ye  said  hospitall  nay  work  nor  drink  in  tyme  ciiing  in  ye  toun 
and  3'*  yai  keip  ye  kirk  halieday  and  tua  preitching  dayes  in  ye  oulk  to  keip 
burialls  and  putt  ye  haill  silver  yai  gett  be  ony  honest  men  or  women  at  buriall 
or  vjwayes  in  ye  box  and  y*  yai  beg  not  without  ye  hospitall  dyk  and  in  cais 
yai  violatt  ony  ane  of  ye  saids  injunctiounes  abouementionat  the  violatter 
y^'of  absolutlie  to  be  depryvit  and  putt  out  of  ye  hospitall  immediatlie  eftir 
tryell  y''of  and  silver  to  be  tane  out  of  ye  box  monethlie  be  ye  deacone  convenar 
and  delt  equallie  amang  ye  pure  in  ye  hospitall.  Lykeas  it  is  ordanet  that  ane 
irne  pott  be  bocht  to  ya  of  sax  pynttis  twa  brasin  pannes  ane  in  and  ane  vy 
less  as  ye  decone  convenar  thinkis  expedient  for  making  of  y  meitt  reddie  to 
be  payet  out  be  3'e  deacone  convenar  and  to  be  allowet  in  his  comptis. 

Kiriie  The  Said  day  thej-  all  in  ane  voice  enteiit  Johne  Kirlie  wabstei  in  ye  hos- 

hM^pUau!"  ^^  pitall  and  ane  gowne  w'  ane  quarter  pay*  is  to  be  gevin  to  him  to  Michaelmes 
nixt. 


Baillie 
printeis. 


Vltimo  August]  1614. 

The  said  day  Johne  Baillie  is  buiket  as  printeis  to  Jo"  Baillie  pewderar 
his  fay^  as  he  q*  enterit  to  his  printeischip  at  Lamnes  1612  zeirs  to  serve  him 
conforme  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie. 


I6i4]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  53 

The  said  day  Gawa  Neving  buikit  printeis  to  James  Graha  conforme  to  Printds 
his  indentof  of  ye  dait  ye  xvj  day  of  De'  1607  zeirs  to  serve  during  ye  space  Nevmg. 
in  ye  lettir  of  gildrie  q»  enterit  at  ye  dait  of  ye  said  indcto''  coforme  to  ye 
ordinance  sett  doun  be  ye  deacones  anet  ye  buiking. 

The  said  day  David  M^heid  printeis  to  Andro  Gray  wobst  is  buiket  heirin 
as  he  qa  enterit  his  printeis  and  was  buiket  in  y  deacones  buik  xxviij  No''  1604. 

The  said  day  Ar''  Leyis  is  buiket  as  printeis  to  Johne  Scott  elder  lorimer  Pnnteij 
as  he  q*  enterit  on  ye  first  day  of  Juhj  last  by  past  that  he  may  haue  ane      ^^'^' 
benefeit  conforme  to  ye  gildrie  he  serving  conforme  y'to  as  his  indento'  beris. 

The  said  day  Matho  Wilsoun  is  buiket  heirin  as  printeis  to  Jo^  Wilsoun  Printeis 
his  broy  to  serve  sewin  zeir  be  his  indento^  daittit  ye  aucht  of  No"'  1610  con-  ^^'''^°"°- 
foime  to  ye  act. 

Vndecimo  Odohris  1614. 

The  qlk  day  Patrik  Maxuall  deacone  covenar  remanent  deacones  of  yis  Lytis  for 
burghe  and  y  counsell  for  ye  maist  pairt  being  convenit  in  ye  Blakfreir  Kirk  convdnar. 
for  electing  of  tua  persounes  of  ye  rank  of  craftismen  best  and  maist  vvorthe 
honest  men  to  be  pntit  to  ye  counsell  of  yis  burghe  w*  ye  auld  deacone  convenar 
that  out  of  ye  thrie  the  deacone  convenar  micht  be  chosin  the  haill  deacones 
and  y  counsell  being  rankit  in  sax  severall  raks  equallie  euerie  rak  removit 
and  ane  out  of  ilk  rank  of  sax  prevaillit  be  pluralitie  of  voitts.  Sua  ye  sax 
persounes  q^^  prevaillit  war  removit  and  be  pluralitie  of  voitts  Ninia  Andersoun 
cordoner  and  \V">  Howie  litster  war  appointtit  to  be  pnted  be  Thomas  Morsoun 
and  W"  Neilsoun  to  ye  proueist  bailleis  and  counsell  to  be  on  ye  lyttis  w'  ye 
auld  deacone  convenar  that  out  of  ye  thrie  ye  deacone  convenar  may  be  chosin 
conforme  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie. 

Decimo  nono  Ociobris  1614. 

The  said  day  Patrik  Maxuall  being  electit  deacone  convenar  for  ye  zeir  to  Four  o"  ye 
cu  be  ye  proueist  bailleis  counsell  and  deacones  haifing  yis  day  convenit  in  counsell  and '* 
ye  Blakfreir  Kirk  to  elect  his  awn  counsell  and  four  persounes  of  ye  craftis 
rak  to  be  on  ye  dea  of  gilds  counsell  for  ye  zeir  to  cu  he  first  nominat  and 
appointtit  ye  haill  deacones  viz  Gabriell  Smythe  Gawa  Neisbit  Thomas  Ritchie 
Wn^  Heriot  Patrik  Bar  Dauid  Scheirar  W^  Gova  Johne  Steuart  James  Allansoun 
James  Watsoun  Johne  Hall  Johne  Clerk  Waltir  Douglas  visitor  w'  James 
Braidvvod,  baillie,  Ro'  Rowatt  Jo"  Andersoun  Dunca  Sempill  Thomas  Morsoun 
Ninia  Andersoun  Alex'  Cauldwoll  James  Fyscher  James  Lichtbodie  Thomas 
Fawsyde  Thomas  Achissoun  W"'  Howie  Jo"  Myller  George  Brum  Gabriell 
Listoun  Jo"  Padie  Jo"  Stirling  W"'  Stalchar  W"*  Neilsoun  Thomas  Wylie  and 
siclyke  out  of  ye  persounes  abouewrittin  removit  in  aucht  persounes  togidder 
be  pluralitie  of  voittis   Rob*  Rowatt   James   Fischer   Ninia  Andersoun   and 


deikin 
conveinars. 


54 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1614 


Piinteis  Rae. 


Hospitalls 
Rentall. 


non  p' 


non  py' 


non  pay' 


Printeis 
Balie. 


Thomas  Morsoun  war  electit  and  chosin  to  be  vpoun  ye  deacon  conveynars 
counsell  for  ye  zeir  to  cu  to  be  pnted  to  ye  dean  of  gild  be  ye  deacone  convenar 
to  y'  effect.  Lykeas  ye  said  deacone  conveinar  tuik  ye  aithis  of  ye  deacones 
and  his  counsell  abouespeit  as  vse  is. 

The  said  day  Jo°  Ra  sone  to  VV"  Ra  in  Bothuell  [is]  buikt  printeis  to 
Jo°  Curae  tailzeo'  burges  of  yis  bur*  as  he  q*  enterit  at  ye  dait  of  ye  indento^ 
sett  downe  betuix  ya  yi'anet  qlk  is  of  ye  dait  ye  x.xiiij  day  of  Februar  1614 
zeirs  conform  to  ye  article  of  gildrie  maid  y^anent. 

James  Lennox  rentall  of  his  rollme  of  ye  bak  almoushous  last 
possest  be  vmqi^  James  WUsoun  and  now  gratit  to  ye  said  James 
Lennox  be  ye  proveist  baUleis  and  counsell  during  his  lyftyme 
coforme  to  the  auld  retail  vacand  be  deeds  of  the  said  vmq'^  James 
Wilson  last  possesso"'. 

Item  Thomas  Wattirstoun  hous  zeirlie        .  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Johne  NichoU  his  hous  in  Drygait  zeirlie   .  .  .  .  vj  s. 

Item  Johnne  Hanna  now  James  Hanna  hous  zeirlie  .  .  viij  s. 

Item  v'mqle  William  Hegait  tenement  now  Ar''  Hegaites  zeirlie      .  v  s. 

Item  ye  teynd  borne  occupyit  be  ye  prio''  zeirlie    .  .  .  vs. 

Item  vmqle  Johne  Bcirrie  loremeir  tenement  zeirlie  .  .  vs. 

Item  Marioun  Walker  tenement  zeirlie       .  .  .  .  vs. 

Item  George  Herbertsoun  tenement  now  Mgrat  M''  zeirlie  .  v  s. 

Item  Ar^  M''  smyt  for  his  tenement  zeirlie  .  .  .  vs. 

Item   \Tnqle   Jo°   Fleiming   tenement   now   Beatrix    Fothik   zeirlie  x  s. 

Item  Johne  Campbell  twa  barnis  at  ye  west  port  now  Mgrat  Lyoun  zeirlie  viij  s. 
Item  Johne  Herbertsoun  tenement  bezond  ye  Gallowgait  burne  iiij  s.  vj  d. 
Item  Dauid  Donald  land  in  Tro\Tiegait  zeirlie        .  .  .  vs. 

Item  George  Herbertsoun  now  Mgaret  M""  for  ane  aker  land  in  Dowhill  zeirlie 

iiij  s.  vj  d. 
Item  James  Lyoun  for  his  tenement  zeirlie  .  .  .  vs. 

Item  ye  tenement  of  vmqle  W™  Hegait  perteining  to  W°^  Andersoun  meilman  iiij  s. 
The  qlk  hx^  Hegait  is  content  be  tane  q""  his  vyer  tenement   yat   payes  v  s. 
and  swa  to  pay  zeirlie  of  the  haUl       .  .  .  .  ix  s. 

Item  George  Elphinstoun  borne  in  S.  Tenevis  gait  zeirlie  .  v  s. 

Item  James  Lawe  goldsmy'  now  George  Zoung  baxteris  tenement  zeirlie    xij  s. 
Suina  .  .  .  .  .  v  ll  xiiij  d. 

XX  Octohris  1614. 

The  said  day  Johne  Balie  is  heirin  buiket  as  q^*  is  bund  printeis  to  Ro' 
Bell  wricht  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeirs  fra  Witsounday 
1613  zeirs  qlk  was  his  enterie  to  his  service  be  y  indento"'  sub'  w'  yf  hands  of 
ye  dait  ye  xxvij  day  of  Maij  1613. 


i6i4]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  55 

The   rcntall   of  the   almous   bed   qlk  was  possest  be  vniq'"  Ar*  Hospitails 
Hamill  and  gevin  to  vmq'e  Rob'  Gemmill  and  now  to  be  vptane  be  '■<=°t*''- 
Jaes  Bawty. 

Item  it  hes  pteining  to  it  aucht  mkis  zeirlie  to  be  vpliftit  furth  of  the  haill 
tenementis  pteining  to  vmqi<=  Mungo  Hanstoune  and  Johne  Hanstoune 
his  sone  of  the  qlk  tenement  David    Landes  southe  tenem'  coft  be  him 
fra  Thoas  Robesoune  as  ane  pairt  y''of  payis  zeirlie  xliij  s.  iiij  d. 

And  ye  bak  tenement  coft  be  ye  said  Dauid  fra  Johne  Hanstoune  guid  ma 
of  the  Haggis  payes  zeirlie         .....       xxviij  s. 

Item  Johne  Hanstounes  foir  hous  payis  ye  rest  of  ye  aucht  mk  extending 
zeirlie  to  .....  .  xxxv  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  the  bed  had  als  meikll  as  ony  y  of  the  four  of  S"^    Mark    Jamestounes 
funda'une  qlk  is  .  .  .  .  .  .  vs. 

Item  W"  Nicoill  for  his  lands  in  Draygait  .  .  .  vj  s. 

Suina  .  .  .  .  v  ll  xij  s.  viij  d. 

Sic  subscribitur 

H.  Gibson. 

Apiid  Glasgw  tertio  sexto  et  decimo  diehus  rep*"'  mensis  Mariij  Anno  Domini 
millesimo  sexcentesimo  decimo  secttndo. 

The  qlk  dayis  rep"^  the  provest  and  baillies  of  the  said  burghe  sittand  in  Craftis 
judgement  ye  particular  personis  efter  namet  ar  decernit  and  ordanit  and  rentail! 
every  ane  of  them  in  maner  speit  as  heritor's  and  possessor's  of  the  tenementis 
and  landis  rep"^  efter  mentionat  to  content  and  pay  to  VV""  Stalker  goldsmy* 
collector  of  the  dewteis  pteaning  to  ye  craftis  hospitall  in  nam  and  behalf  of 
Ninian  AndLrsoun  dykin  conveiner  and  in  nam  and  behalf  of  ye  dykins  of 
craftis  w'in  the  said  bur'  and  y''  successo''s  in  office  the  pticular  annuellis 
efterspeit  zeirlie  to  be  vpliftit  fur'  of  the  tenementis  and  landis  rep"^  occupyit 
and  possest  be  tham  as  they  quha  ar  heritor's  and  present  possesso'^s  yairof 
qlks  anuells  sumtym  pteanit  to  ye  beddis  of  ye  bak  almoushous  and  qlk  now 
ar  assignit  to  ye  said  hospitall  viz : 

Jean  Maxuell  prnt  possessor  of  the  tene'  of  land  pteaning  to  Thomas  Hanay  viij  s. 
Ar'i  Heygat  proprietar  of  the  tenement  of  land  pntlie  possest  be  himself  v  s. 
And  as  he  quha  is  decernit  of  his  awn  consent  to  pay  zeirlie  out  of  the  said 

tenement  for  the  tenement  and  zaird  pteaning  to  W™  Andirsoun  meilman 

iiij  s. 
Johne  Rankein  pnt  possesso''  of  the  tenement  of  land  perteining  to  Margaret 

Mwr    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  vs. 

The  airis  of  vmq'e  ]y[r  j^Qt  Landes  Jo°  Robisoun  possesso""  VV™  Lenox  Walter 

Lochheid  and  W°i  Lugie  heritor's  and  possesso''s  of  the  tenement  of  land 

sumtym  pteining  to  Mungo  and  Johne  Hastouns         .       v  ti   vj  s.   viij  d. 


56  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1614 

To  be  payit  be  tham  conform  to  the  rentell  and  as  ye  same  is  particularlie 
devyded  y''in. 

William  Nycoll  his  tenement  in  Drygait     .  .  .  .  vj  s. 

Johne  Drew  zunger  for  the  tenement  perteining  to  vmq'^  Ar''  Mwr  smy*    v  s. 

James  Wattirstoun  his  tenement    .  .  .  .  .  x  s. 

Johne  Dalrumpill  merchand  and  vtheris  occupyers  and  possessors  of  the 
tenement  of  land  bale  and  foir  w'  the  zaird  sumtym  pteining  to  vmq'* 
Johne  Flemyg  mercheand        .  .  .  .  .  x  s. 

Johne  Allassoun  his  tenement  of  land  in  Troingait  .  .  vs. 

Richard  Woddrop  herito''  and  Johne  Andirsoun  possesso''  of  the  tenement 
of  land  bezon  the  Gallowgait  bwrn         .  .  .  iv  s.  vj  d. 

Gabriell  Smy'  his  tenement  of  land  possest  be  James  Leischman  becaus  he 
being  thrj-s  lawfuUie  warnit  and  last  be  Mathow  Ker  ofiicier  compeirit 
not      .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  vs. 

George  Zung  baxter  his  tenement  of  land  in  Saltmercat     .  .  xi)  s. 

Ninian  Gilhagie  his  aiker  of  land  in  Dowhill  .  .  iiij  s.  vj  d. 

Maran  Scot  hir  born  in  S.  Tenochis  gait     .  .  .  .  vs. 

Maran  Walker  lyfrenter  of  the  tenement  of  land  possest  be  hir  v  s. 

Thomas  Broun  his  twa  bornis  at  ye  west  port  sumtym  Johne  Campbellis     viij  s. 

Ely*  Arbucle  lyfrenter  of  the  tenement  of  land  possest  be  hir  in  Briggait       x  s. 

Becaus  thay  hieing  thrys  law"  warnit  and  last  be  Mathow  Ker  ofiicier 
compeirit  not  and  v'  as  for  ye  Witsouneday  and  Martimes  termes  the  zeir  of 
God  jajvjc  and  alevin  zeiris  and  sicklyk  ye  saids  persounis  as  heritors  lyfrenters 
and  possessors  of  the  tenementis  of  land  and  aikcr  of  land  repu^  abouewrittin 
and  euerie  ane  of  them  are  decernit  and  ordanit  to  content  and  pay  to  the 
said  dykin  conveiner  dykin  of  craftis  and  yair  successors  in  office  and  to  yf 
collectors  for  the  tym  of  the  dewteis  pteaning  to  yair  hospitall  the  particular 
anuellis  rep"®  abouewrittin  zeirlie  to  be  vpliftit  fur*  of  yair  saids  tenementis 
and  aiker  of  land  and  that  zeirlie  and  tmes  in  tym  to  cum  the  termes  of  payment 
bieing  bypast  all  thay  and  yair  predecessors  quha  ar  addettit  in  the  saids 
anuel  rentis  conform  to  the  auld  rentell  pducit. 

Extractum  de  libro  actorum  per  me. 

Sic  subscribitur 

Ar<^  Heygait. 

The  craftis  hospitalls  auld  rentall  as   the  samen  wes  foundit   be 
vmq'«  Sr  Ronnald  Blakader  Subdean  of  Glasgow. 


RentaU.  Laurie  Schaw  and  W'"  Rychie  yair  tenement  in  Stokwell 

Arthour  Allan  his  new  hous  in  Briggait 
Colein  Campbell  his  new  bigit  tenement  in  Briggait 
Thomas  Mwr  his  hous  in  Briggait 
Henrie  Spreuell  his  hous  in  Briggait 


V]  s. 

xs. 
xj  s. 

xs. 
XX  s. 


i6i4]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


57 


Johne  Nesmy'  his  hous  in  Briggait  and  now  Jo"  Howie 
Johnc  Barris  his  hous  in  Briggait 
George  Glasgw  his  hous  in  Briggait 
Johne  Patirsonis  hous  in  Briggait 
James  Clerkis  tenement     .... 
Johne  Donaldis  hous  in  Saltmercat  and  now  W""  Howie 
Mathow  Trumbls  tenement  occupyit  be  George  Huchiesoun 
Rychard  Woddroppis  tenement  bezon  the  Gallowgait  bwTn 
Ar'^  Halhs  hous  abo%'e  the  cros 
Smythis  tenement  perteaning  to  M''  Hew  Gibsoun 
Johne  Drew  ..... 

Mathow  Colquhoun  and  Johne  Gillespie  for  wrychts  lad 
Quintein  Rankein  his  hows  in  Rattenraw  . 
Johne  Spreull  his  hows  in  Drygait 
William  Clerk  in  Drygait 
William  Kirkland  in  Drygait 

James  Hall  for  William  Allassoun  his  hows  in  Drygaite 
William  Nicoll  his  hous  in  Drygaite 
Mair  for  the  hous  he  dwells  in        . 
Robert  Maxuell      ..... 
Johne  Drew  and  Scheraris  hows  in  Drygait 
William  Thomsoun  and  James  Wattirstoun  in  Stabilgrein 
Bessie  Colveinis  waist  now  occupyit  be  W""  Reed 
The  waist  borne  in  Rattounraw  perteining  to  Claud  Hamiltoun  of  Cochnoche 

xxiiij  s. 

Suma  of  yis  auld  retail  .  .  xxvj  li  xix  s.  viiij  d. 

Hew  Blair  his  few  of  his  four  aiker  of  land  .  vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Johne  Dobbie  his  few  dewtie  for  ye  hospitall  sted  with  the  pertinentis 

vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Wmq"  Patrik  Walkeris  hows  Euphame  Wilson  viij  li  qlk  is  vnder  reuersioun. 

Deduce  de  tua  iliks.  Sua  .  .  .  .      v  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

M''  Robert  Herbiesoun  for  his  outfeild  land  and  Deinsyd  zaird     iiij  tl  x  s.  iiij  d. 

Suiiia  ....  xxiiij  ti  x  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  to  yis  rentall  awin  be  Agnes  Steill        ....  xiij  s. 

Be  Androw  Haddoweis  land  in  Briggait     ....  xxix  s. 

Sauld  be  M''  Ro*  Allassoun  to  ye  deacones  inde      .  .  .  xiij  s. 

The  zeirlie  denieis  astrictit  be  ye  deacones  for  ye  weill  of  ye  piiire  to  be  payet 
be  yame  to  ye  deacone  convenar  quarterlie. 

The  visitc  of  maltmen  and  meilme  zeirlie  .  .  .  xxx  li 

Deacon  of  ye  smythis  payes  zeirlie              .  .  .  .  xx  ll 

Deacone  of  ye  tailzeo^s  payes  zeirlie            .  .  .  .  xx  ll 

Deacone  of  ye  cordoners  payes  zeirlie         .  .  .  .  .\x  li 


XX  s. 

xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xxviij  s. 

XV  s. 

xxiiij  s. 

xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

.XX  s. 

non  p' 

xiiij  s. 

XV  s. 

-xx  s. 

X  5.  not  p' 

X  s. 

xi.x  s. 

XX  s. 

iiij  1l 

iijs. 

XV  j  s. 

xvj  s. 

iij  ll 

xj  s. 

\ 

vj  s.  viij  d. 

vj  s.  viij  d. 

XV  s. 

xij  s. 

non  p' 

non  p. 


58 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1614 


B urges 
Wilsone. 


Surges  Gib. 


Prenteis 
Cochrane. 


Deacone  of  ye  wobsters  payes  zeirlie 

Deacone  of  ye  skynneris  payes  zeirlie 

Deacone  of  ye  couperis  payes  zeirlie 

Deacone  of  ye  baxteris  payes  zeirlie 

Deacone  of  ye  wrichtis  payes  zeirlie 

Deacone  of  ye  masounes  payes  zeirlie 

Deacone  of  ye  chyTurgeanes  payes  zeirlie 

Deacone  of  ye  bonnetmakers  payes  zeirlie 

Deacone  of  ye  flescheo''s    . 

To  be  payet  be  yame  quarterlie  to  ye  deacone  convenar. 


vj  li 


iij  ll 


X  ll 

xH 

viij  ll 

xii]  s.  iiij  d. 

viij  ll 

iiij  ll 

vj  s.  viij  d. 

Iiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xH 


xvj  JoT*'  1615. 
The  qlk  day  W"  Wilsoun  maltma  is  ordanet  to  be  buiket  heirin  as  he 
q^  is  worthe  ye  sowme  of  frie  geir  contenit  in  y*  article  of  ye  lettir  of  gildrie 
maid  anent  ye  sowme  craftismen  sould  be  worthe  befoir  yai  be  resauit  burges 
and  q^  hes  mareit  Margaret  Cowthird  dochtir  to  vmqle  W™  Cowthird  maltma 
burges  of  Glasgw  and  the  deacone  convenars  warrad  gevin  be  him  for  entering 
burges  as  said  is. 

And  als  James  Gib  maltma  sone  to  v^mqle  James  Gib  mchead  burges  of 
yis  burg  he  is  ordanet  to  be  buikit  heirintill  as  q^  is  worthe  the  sowme  of  frie 
geir  contenit  in  ye  lettir  of  gildrie  and  hes  ressauit  ane  warrand  of  ye  deaco 
convenar  to  be  burges  as  said  is. 

Thomas  Cochera  sone  to  Rot  Cocheran  burges  of  yis  burghe  is  to  be  maid 
burges  and  hes  ressauit  ye  deacone  convenars  warrand  to  y'  effect  y*  he  is 
worthe  ye  sowme  of  frie  geir  contenit  in  ye  lettir  of  gildrie  that  all  psones  sould 
be  worthe  befoir  they  be  ressauit  burges  of  ye  craftis  rank. 


Prenteis 
Zoung. 


Prenteis 
Zoung. 


At"  Leyes. 


Burges 
Cocherane. 


The  said  day  at  comand  of  ye  deacone  convenar  in  pns  of  Thomas  Morsoun 
Jo°  Zoung  sone  lau"  to  James  Zoung  cairter  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  quha  is 
printeis  to  Henrie  Smythe  skyner  burges  of  yis  bur'  conforme  to  his  enteric 
in  printeischip  w'  him  qlk  was  vpoun  ye  xxj  of  October  1607  quha  hes  seruit 
his  maister  as  printeis  sen  syne. 

And  siclyke  James  Zoung  sone  lau"  to  ye  said  James  at  comad  foirsaid 
is  buikit  heiring  as  he  q*  was  and  is  printeis  to  Jo°  Gemyll  elder  skyner  burges 
of  yis  burghe  to  serue  conforme  to  ye  ordo''. 

Ar<i  Lej'is  is  buikit  heirin  as  printeis  to  Jo°  Scott  lorimer  elder  burges  of 
yis  burghe  q*  enterit  to  his  service  ye  first  of  Julij  1614  be  his  indento^  of  ye 
dait  of  his  enterie  to  serwe  for  ye  space  of  vij  zeirs. 

And  siclyke  Gabriell  Cocherane  skyner  [is]  buikit  heirin  and  ressauit  ane 
warrand  to  be  burges  conforme  to  ye  ordoi. 


dewtie. 


1615]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  59 

And  als  Matho  Wilsoun  fischer  is  buiket  harin  as  ane  craftisma  to  be  Burges 
enterit  burges  and  ane  warrad  gevin  be  ye  deacone  convenar  to  him  to  y' 
effect. 

And  als  Henrie  Robiesoun  beltmaker  is  buikit  heirin  as  he  q*  ressauit  Burges 
ane  warrand  fra  ye  deacone  convenar  to  be  burges. 

And  als  Rit'*  Alia  cordoner  buikit  and  q^'  hes  ressauit  ye  deacone  convenars  Burges  Aiiane. 
warrand  to  be  burges. 

And  siclyke  Waltir  Bowie  skyner  prenteis  to  Edward  Bowie  skyner  is  Burges  Bowie, 
buiket  q"  ressauit  ane  warrad  of  ye  deacone  convenar  to  be  burges. 

Decimo  octavo  Janitarij  1615  zeirs. 
The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  haill  deacones  and  y  counsell  convenit  Compt  anent 

craftis 

for  ye  ty  in  ye  hospitall  for  heiring  ye  deacone  convenars  compt  of  ye  rentalls  hospitall 
and  haill  zeirlie  dewteis  and  vj  s.  ptening  to  ye  craftis  rentall  compta  y^'in 
xxvj  tl  .xvj  s.  qlk  he  ressauit  fra  Thomas  Morsoun  last  deacone  convenar 
qlk  restit  in  his  hands  extending  his  haill  chairge  fra  Michaelmes  1613  to 
Michaelmes  1614  zeirs  to  four  hundrethe  sevintein  punds  four  schilling  viij  d. 
and  be  his  discharge  dischairget  himself  of  ye  particular  debursings  debursit 
be  him  to  ye  craftis  weill  necessar  to  be  debursit  and  allowet  be  ye  haill  deacones 
and  counsell  extending  to  three  hundrethe  fiftie  punds  xiij  s.  viij  d.  sua  his  chairge 
and  dischairge  being  confermit  he  is  fund  to  haue  in  his  hands  thrie  scoir  sax 
punds  saxtein  schillingis  q^'of  ye  deacones  ordanet  four  pund  to  be  gevin  to 
Matho  Calmeroun  offi"'  by  his  fey  to  be  ane  help  to  ye  nixt  o&  for  ingaddering 
of  the  craftis  deuteis  and  fiftie  sax  schilling  to  ye  clarks  ma  for  copeing  ye 
funda'un  of  ye  hospitall  to  M''  Jo"  Howiesoun  and  ye  rentalls  q^'of  he  hes  in  his 
hands  inst  thrie  scoir  punds  of  ye  said  zeirs  rent  and  y''foir  the  saids  deacones 
and  y  counsell  exonerit  and  simpl"'  discharge!  the  said  Patrik  Maxuall  deacone 
convenar  of  his  intromissioun  w'  the  craftis  geir  fra  ye  said  tme  of  Michaelmes 
1613  to  Michaelmes  1614  and  y'  conforme  to  his  compt  he  making  ye  said 
sowme  of  thrie  scoir  punds  restand  in  his  hands  furthcuand  to  yame  at  his 
nixt  compt  and  ordanet  his  compt  to  be  subscryuit  and  he  discharget  as  is 
abouewritten. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  and  deacones  electit  and  chusit  Matho  Ker  officer. 
Ker  oifif  for  ingaddering  of  y  dewteis  for  ye  zeir  to  cu  viz  to  Michaelmes  nixt 
to  cum  quha  maid  faithe  de  fideli  administra' ne  in  his  said  office. 


The  said  day  ye  deacon  convenar  giftit  frielie  to  ye  deacones  and  weill  Deikin 
of  ye  pure  in  y  hospitall  in  remebrace  of  his  preservatioun  at  Godis  pleasof  his  gift  to  ye 
of  his  awin  and  his  wyfs  seikines  ane  hundrethe  pundis  money  in  ye  first  end  anl^iJundrethe 
q'of  ye  deacones  and  y  counsell  hes  ordanet  him  to  by  ane  mortclaithe  of  velvett  punds. 


6o 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1615 


and  y'  to  ye  vse  of  all  ye  craftis  and  y  assistaris  and  hes  ordanet  that  ilk  psoune 
of  ye  craftis  rak  craitis  ye  samy  for  y  awin  vse  to  cover  ony  corpis  sail  pay 
fourtie  schillingis  y''foir  to  yair  said  hospitall  and  weill  of  ye  pure  as  ane 
ordinance  in  ty  cuing  and  not  to  be  gevin  out  q"  ye  samy  be  payet. 


Box  m's. 


The  said  day  the  keyis  of  ye  box  gevin  to  Waltir  Douglas  Willia  Howie 
and  Gabriell  Smythe  to  ilk  ane  of  ya  ane  key  to  be  delyuerit  be  ya  at  ye  nixt 
electioun  of  ye  deaconvenar. 


Prenteis 
Finlay. 


xviii  Fe"'  1615. 

The  said  day  Rob'  Finlay  wobster  is  buikit  heirin  as  prenteis  to  W™ 
Wode  wobster  burges  of  this  bur'  conforme  to  his  indento'  buikit  in  ye  deac6 
of  ye  wobsters  bulk  ye  xviij  of  Fe''  1604. 


4  Maij  1615. 

Burges  Wrie.  The  said  day  Patrik  Vrie  tailzeo''  sone  to  Patrik  Vrie  maltma  is  buikit 

heirin  q^  hes  ressauit  ye  deacone  convenars  warrad  to  be  maid  burges  conforme 
to  ye  ordo''. 


Prenteis 
Baird. 


Burges  Park. 


Prenteis 
Brysone. 


Prenteis 

Watsone. 


Prenteis 
Haye. 


Burges 
Calderwood. 


xvij  Mat]  161 5. 

The  said  day  Johne  Baird  sone  to  vmqle  Michaell  Baird  in  Colstoun  is 
buikit  heirin  as  prenteis  to  Jo"  Baird  wobst  burges  of  yis  bur'  to  serve  for  ye 
space  of  sevin  zeirs  conforme  to  his  indento''  of  ye  dait  of  yir  pntis. 

Prtmo  Junij. 

The  said  day  Andro  Park  tailzeo''  in  Bogtoun  ressauit  ye  deacone  convenars 
warrand  to  be  maid  ane  burges  and  is  buikit  heirin. 

The  said  day  Patrik  Brysoun  sone  to  James  Brysoune  in  Auchinlek  is 
buikit  prenteis  to  Patrik  Leggatt  cordoner  conform  to  his  indento'  of  ye  dait 
ye  xxiiij  day  of  Februar  1612  zeirs. 

Sexto  Junij. 
The  said  day  Rob'  Watsoun  sone  to  W"'  Watsoun  in  Ballernok  is  buikit 
prenteis  to  James  Finlay  tailzeo''  burges  of  yis  burghe  conforme  to  yis  indento''. 

xviij  Junij  1615. 
The  said  day  Johne  Hay  is  buikit   printeis  to  Ro'  Andersoune  skyner 
burgis  of  yis  bur'  q^s  enteric  was  at  Mtimes  last  bypast  to  serwe  for  ye  space 
of  sewin  [years]  conforme  to  ye  indento''  sett  downe  yfanent. 

xxj  Junij. 
The  said  day  Dauid  Calderwod  smythe  is  buiket  heirin  q"  ressavit  ye 
deacone  convenars  warrand  to  be  maid  burges. 


i6i5]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  6i 

xxij  Junij. 
The  said  day   Dauid   Robiesoun   bonnetmaker   is  buiket   heirin   and   q*  Burges 
ressauit  ye  deacone  convenars  warrand  to  be  maid  burges. 

xxiiij  Junij. 
The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  deacones  and  y  counsell  being  convenit  Act  to  give 
in  ye  hospital!  the  deacones  ordanet  the  deacone  convenar  give  of  his  intro-  Anders^anelij 
missioun  thrie  pund  thrie  schilHng  to  James  Fischer  and  W™  Andersoun  to  lib.  iij  s. 
mak  ilk  ane  of  ya  out  xij  li  to  help  y  chairges  ye  last  raid  yai  raid  w'  ye  bischop 
to  Ed'  q^of  yai  gaue  him  bak  xx  s.  to  ye  hospitall. 

The  said  day  W™  Neilsoun  is  appointtit  to  ouersie  ye  work  of  ye  hospitall.  O'seir 

The  said  day  George  Blair  sone  to  vmqle  Ro*  Blair  is  buik  as  printeis  to  Prenteis  Blair. 
Alex"'  Gem.yll  wobster  be  his  indento''  q*is   enterie  was  vpoun  ye  x  day  of 
Maij  last  to  serve  sevin  zeir  and  twa  zeir  for  meitt  and  fie. 

And  siclyke  ye  xvij  of  Maij  1615  W"  Boyd  skyner  ressavit  ane  warrand  Burges  Boyde 
to  be  maid  burges  and  is  now  buikit  heirin. 

And  siclyke  Willia  Lyndsay  smythe  is  buikit  heirin  and  ressauit  ye  deacone  Burges 
convenars  warrand  to  be  maid  burges  vpon  ye  aucht  day  of  Junij  instant.       Lyndsay. 

xxix  Junij. 
The  said  day  William  and  Patrik  Clerks  and  Jo"  Walker  all  wobsters  Burgess 
buikit  heirin  as  yai  q*  haue  ressauit  ilk  ane  of  ya  ane  warrand  of  ye  deacone  ^•'^  j^^  ^"'^ 
convenar  to  be  maid  burgess. 

xj  Julij. 
The  said  day  Hew  Spreull  buikit  printeis  to  Jo"  Mitchell  elder  tailzeo^  Prenteis 
conforme  to  y  indento''  of  ye  dait  ye  xj  day  of  Julij  1615  to  serve  the  space    P''^""- 
of  sewin  zeir. 

The  said  day  Matho  Thome  sone  to  Matho  Thome  in  Dabarto  is  buiket  prenteis 
printeis  to  Willia  Gova  bonnetmaker  to  serue  for  ye  space  of  vij  zeir  fra  his  Thome, 
enterie  qlk  was  at    Belta  last  bypast  conforme  to  ye  indento^    sett    downe 
y''anent. 

xiij  Julij. 

The  said  day  Olipher  Pittilloche  beltmaker  and  Jo"  Patirsone  zounger  Burgess 
wobster  ilk  ane  of  ya  ressauit  ane  wan  ad  fra  ye  deacone  convenar  to  be  maid  an'^j''""^*^* 
burges  and  ar  buikit  heirin.  Patirsone. 

The  said  day  Thomas  Hutchesoun  is  buiket  heirin  as  prenteis  to  Thomas  prenteis 
Achisoun  litster  to  serve  him  sewin  zeirs  conforme  to  his  indento''  daitit  ye  Hutchesone. 
xxj  day  of  Ja'  1615  zeirs. 


62 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1615 


Surges 
Robesone. 


The  said  day  James  Robiesoun  zounger  flescheo''  is  buikit  heirin  as  he 
qa  hes  ressauit  ye  deacone  convenars  warrand  to  be  maid  burges. 


Surges 

SpreuU. 


Decimo  Aii^K 

The  said  da}-  Andro  Spreull  wobst  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q^  ressauit  ane 
warrad  of  \-e  deacone  convenar  to  be  maid  ane  burges. 


xvij  Ait^>  1615. 

Burgess  The  said  day  WUha  Fischer  maltma  and  Dauid  Neill  zounger  cordoner 

Ne^ui.^"^  ^"       baithe  ar  buiket  heirin  as  yai  q*  haif  ressauit  Uk  ane  of  ya  the  deacone  convenars 
'-varrad  to  be  maid  burges. 


Deikin 

convenars 
discharge  to 
ye  craftis  of 
yair  quarter 
comptis. 


Act  anent  ye 
deikin  oi 
wobsteris. 


Pair  men  in 
ye  hospitall 
imput. 


xviij  An^J  1615. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  deacones  and  y  counsel!  being  convenit 
in  ye  hospitall  about  sinderie  adois  the  sd  deacone  convenar  discharrget  the 
visitor  the  deacones  of  ye  tailzeo''s  cordoners  skyners  coupers  bonnetmakers 
and  wobsters  of  y  quarter  comptis  ye  tmes  of  Hallowmes  Cadilmes  Belta  and 
Labmes  1615  zeirs  the  deacone  of  ye  baxters  dischairget  of  \e  Hallowmes 
Belta  and  Candilmes  tmes  last  bypast  the  smythis  auchtand  ^-e  haill  four 
tmes  except  ten  mk  deacone  of  ye  uTichtis  dischairget  of  ye  tmes  of  Hallowmes 
Candilmes  and  Belta  last  the  deacone  of  ye  masounes  dischairgetof  ye  Hallowmes 
and  CandOmes  tmes  last  bypast  and  als  ye  deacones  of  ye  chyrurgiaes  and 
flescheo's  dischairget  of  ye  saids  thrie  first  tmes  and  y^\  rest  ye  last  tme. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  of  ye  wobsters  become  in  ye  deacone  convenars 
will  for  ye  offence  done  be  him  in  taking  ye  place  in  ye  hospitall  w'  his  craft 
and  y'by  debarring  ye  deacone  convenar  he  being  warnint  to  his  court  at  ye 
samen  ho''  of  ye  day. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  deacones  and  y  counsell  convenit  for 
ye  tj-me  all  in  ane  voice  hes  placet  Johne  Leggat  and  Jo"  Scherar  pare  men  in 
ye  hospitall  and  ye  gowTies  deljoierit  to  yame  and  ane  qucU^ter  paymet 
appointtit  to  be  gevin  to  yame  betuix  ya  to  Michaelmes  nixtocum  and  fra 
thyne  furthe  y  full  deutie  appointtit  to  ya  during  y  tyme  and  guid  beha%ao'' 
conform  to  ye  injunctiounes  sett  down  y^anent. 


Qninto  Octobris  1615. 

Prenteis  Bar  The  Said  day  Johne  Bar  sone  to  Jo"  Bar  in  Haggis  is  buiket  heirin  as 

printeis  to  Henrie  Smythe  skJTier  burges  of  yis  burghe  be  his  indento'  maid 
betuix  yame  y^'anent  of  ye  dait  ye  first  day  of  No""  1614  zeirs  to  serwe  for  sewin 
zeiiis. 


i6i5]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  63 

Sexto  Octobris  1615. 
The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  deacones  and  y  counsall  convenit  Lytis  for 


deikin 
conveinar. 


for  ye  ty  in  ye  hospitall  for  electing  of  tua  of  honest  me  of  ye  rak  of  craftismen 
to  be  presentit  on  lytt  to  ye  counsell  w'  ye  auld  deacone  convenar  that  out 
of  ye  thrie  ye  deacone  convenar  may  be  chosin  they  first  rakit  ye  haill  deacones 
and  y  counsell  in  sax  seuerall  raks  sax  persounes  in  ilk  copanie  and  removit 
ilk  rak  eftir  v^'^s  and  voittit  ane  persoune  out  of  ilk  rak  and  thay  removit  the 
sax  persounes  tane  out  be  woitt  out  of  ye  haill  and  woittit  about  qlk  tua  of  ye  ' 
sax  sould  be  on  lytt  foirsaid  qJ'by  Thomas  Morsoune  and  James  Fischer  be 
pluralitie  of  woitts  prevaillit  and  war  appointtit  to  be  putt  on  lytt  w'  ye  auld 
deacone  convenar  and  to  be  presentid  to  ye  counsell  be  Waltir  Douglas  and 
W"  Howie  to  ye  effect  abouewrittin. 

Decimo  quarto  Octobris  1615. 

The  said  day  James  Fischer  being  chosin  deacon  convenar  befoir  ye  Deikin 
counsell  to  Michaelmes  nixtocii  haifing  convenit  himself  wt  ye  hailj  deacones  counseU^"^  '^ 
of  yis  burghe  quhome  w'  ye  psounes  vnderwrittin  he  hes  nominat  and 
appointit  to  be  vpoun  his  counsell  viz  Jo"  Scott  deacone  of  ye  smithis  Ro' 
M'^Cure  deacone  of  ye  tailzeCs  Thomas  Ritchie  deacone  of  ye  cordoneis  George 
Bogill  deacone  of  ye  skyners  Dauid  Scherar  deacone  of  ye  coupers  Alex'' 
Stirling  deacoe  of  ye  bonnetmakers  Ro*  Watsoun  deacone  of  ye  flescheo^'s 
Andro  Mylne  deacone  of  ye  chyrurgianes  Jo°  Davie  deacone  of  ye  masounes 
James  Mayne  deacone  of  ye  wrichtis  Waltir  Douglas  visito""  George  Scherelaw 
deacone  of  yc  wobsters  and  W™Heriot  deacone  of  yebaxters  w'  James  Braidwod, 
baillie,  Ro*  Rowatt  Jo"  Andersoune  Patrik  Maxuall  Thomas  Morsoune  Ninia 
Andersoun  Alex''  Caul  dwell  James  Lichtbodie  Thomas  Achissoun  Gawane 
Neisbit  W"i  Wilsoun  Thomas  Fawsyde  W"*  Howie  W™  NeUsoun  Jo"  Padie 
Gabriell  Listoun  Gabriell  Smythe  W"  Andersoune  W""  Stalchar  and  George 
Mure  mariner  and  than  they  all  being  suorne  enterit  to  ye  electioun  of  four 
persounes  maist  meit  of  ye  craftisrak  to  be  on  ye  deane  of  gilds  counsell  for 
ye  zeir  to  cii  and  removit  aucht  of  ye  persounes  abouewrittin  at  four  seuerall 
tymes  out  of  q'^  be  pluralitie  of  woittis  Robert  Rowatt  Thomas  Morsoun 
Patrik  Maxuall  and  Ninia  Andersoun  ar  appointtit  to  be  on  ye  dean  of  gUds 
counsell  for  ye  zeir  to  cum  to  be  pntid  to  ye  deane  of  gild  to  y'  effect. 

The  said  day  M'  Jo"  Huchesoun  chosin  clerk  for  ye  zeir  to  cum.  Huchesone 

clerk. 

Symone  Baird  chosin  offi''  for  ye  zeir  to  cu  suorne  and  admittit.  Baird  offi'. 

The  said  day  Allane  Andersoun  wobst  buikit  heirin  as  he  q*  hes  ressauit  Burges 
the  deacone  convenars  warrad  to  be  maid  burges.  "  rsone. 


64 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1615 


xxvj  Odobris  1615. 

Burges  The  Said  day  Eliazer  Hamiltoun  skyner  was  buikit  in  vis  ye  deacone 

convenars  buik  and  ressauit  yis  warrad  to  be  maid  burges. 


Printeis 
Murdochc. 


Prenteis 
Schaw. 


Prenteis 

Wodrope. 


Burges 
Herriot. 


Burges  Louk. 


Burges  Hall. 


Prenteis 
Fergus. 


Deikin 
convenar  his 
compt. 


The  said  day  Ro'  Murdoche  zounger  is  buikit  heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund 
printeis  to  George  Andersoune  cordoner  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  him  ye 
space  of  sewin  zeiris  and  ane  zeir  for  meitt  and  fie  be  ye  indents  daittit  ye 
xxj  day  of  Junij  1614  zeirs. 

xxviij  Odobris  1615. 

The  said  day  Thomas  Schaw  sone  to  vmqle  Jo"  Schaw  in  Craigaburn  [is] 
buikit  printeis  to  Jo"  Patirsoun  wobst  sone  to  At'^  Patirsoun  be  his  indento' 
of  ye  dait  heirof  to  serue  fra  his  enterie  qlk  is  appointtit  to  be  at  Mtimes 
nixtocu  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeirs  conforme  to  ye  said  indento'. 

Odavo  No's  1615. 

The  said  day  Jo"  Woddrope  sone  to  vmqle  Alex""  Woddrope  in  Schettilstoun 
is  buiket  heirin  as  q*  is  printeis  to  Gilbert  Woddrope  cordoner  burges  of 
Glasgw  conforme  to  his  indento^  sett  doun  betuix  ya  y^anent  of  ye  dait  of  yis 
pnt  act. 

The  said  day  Matho  Heriot  baxter  sone  to  vmqle  Jo"  Heriot  baxter  burges 
of  Glasgw  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q*  is  to  be  enterit  friema  w*  ye  baxters  conforme 
to  ye  ordo^. 

xvj  N(fs  1615. 

The  said  day  Ar''  Louk  zounger  maltma  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q'  hes 
ressauit  ye  deacone  convenars  warrad  to  ye  dean  of  gild  to  be  maid  burges  of 
yis  bur*. 

The  said  day  Jo"  Hall  tailzeo''  is  buikit  heirin  and  hes  ressauit  ye  deacone 
convenars  warrad  to  ye  deane  of  gild  to  ye  effect  he  may  be  maid  ane  burges. 

Primo  De's  1615. 

The  said  day  Willia  Fergus  buikit  heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to  James 
Rowatt  smythe  to  serwe  for  ye  space  of  vij  zeir  and  twa  zeir  for  meitt  and  fie 
qlk  W™  Fergus  is  sone  to  vmqle  Ro*  Fergus  in  Inchkellie  as  his  indento'  of  ye 
dait  ye  last  day  of  No"'  last  bypast  beiris. 

Court  haklin  be  ye  deacone  convenar  deacones  of  yis  bur*  and 
yair  counsell  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  vpoun  ye  nyyit  day  of  December 
1615  zeiris  for  heiring  of  Patrik  Maxuall  last  deacone  covenar  his 
compt  of  ye  craftis  guids  and  geir  fra  Michaellmes  1614  to  Michaellmes 
1615  zeiris  quhairof  the  charge  and  discharge  foUowes  in  particular. 


i6i5]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


65 


Chairge. 

Item  in  the  first  the  said  Patrik  hes  restand  in  his  hands  of  his  last  compt  fra 

Michaellmes  1613  to  Michaelhnes  1614  zeiris 
Item  ye  craftis  new  rentall  .  .  .  j^Hj  li  xiij  s. 


Item  ye  craftis  auld  rentall 
Item  fra  Hew  Blair 
Item  Johne  Dobbeis  few  deutie 
Item  Euphame  Wilsoune  wedow 
Item  fra  M''  Robert  Herbiesoune 


xxvj  ll  X  s. 
vj  li  xiij  s. 
vj  ll  xiij  s. 
vj  li  xiij  s. 
iiij  ll  X  s.  iiij  d. 
ye 


Ixli 
iiij  d. 
iiij  d. 
iiij  d. 
iiij  d. 
iiij  d. 


iiij  ll 

vH 

XX  s. 

xl  s. 

ii] 

li 

vjs. 

viij  d. 

tv 

H 

vjs. 

viij  d. 

Item  ye  anuell  of  ye  haill  money  qlk  M""    Jo"    Howiesoune    donttit    to 
hospitall  for  ye  Mertimes  tme  1614  and  Witsounday  tme  1615  zeiris 

ijcxl  t 
Suma  ....  v'^iij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Giflii  money  to  ye  pure  the  said  zeir. 

Item  be  Gabriell  Conynghame 
Item  be  Johne  Padie 
Item  be  Andro  Snype 
Item  be  James  Padie 
Item  be  Adame  Ritchie 
Suma 

Item  ye  vj  s.  and  v  merkis  payet  be  ye  craftismen  enterit  burgess 
ye  said  zeir. 

Item  fra  Johne  Soiiiervell 

Item  fra  Andro  Mylne 

Item  fra  Dauid  Polloks  gude  sone  beltmaker 

Item  be  Archibald  Home  wobster 

Item  be  James  Gray  wobster 

Item  be  Johne  Gib 

Item  be  Michaell  Spens  guid  sone 

Item  be  Robert  Watsoune 

Item  be  Ritcheart  Herbiesone 

Item  Patrik  Vreis  sone 

Item  be  Johne  Boyd 

Item  fra  James  Cocherane 

Item  fra  William  Lyndsay 

Item  Johne  Gemylls  guid  sone 

Item  Dauid  Calderwood  zounger 

Item  Olipher  Pittilloche     . 

Item  James  Robiesoune 

Item  Alex'  Allane 

E 


• 

V]S 

. 

xjs 

. 

xlvj  s 

iij  ll  vj 

s.  viij  d 

iij  li  vj 

s.  viij  d 

vjs 

xlvj  s 

iij  li  vj 

s.  viij  d 

vjs 

vjs 

vjs 

vjs 

iij  H  vj 

s.  viij  d 

vjs 

vjs. 

vjs. 

vj  s. 

vjs 

66  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1615 

Item  fra  William  and  Patrik  Clarks  .  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Item  Dauid  Neill  zounger  .  .  .  .  .  vj  s. 

Item  William  Fischer  maltma        .  .  .  .  .  vj  s. 

Item  Ninian  Andirsoune  hes  in  his  hands  qlk  he  ressauit  in  ye  deacone  convenars 
absence. 

Suma  ....  xxvj  I1  v  s.  iiij  d. 

The  tua  beds  of  ye  bak  almoushous  addettit  to  yame  is 

X  i  vii]  s.  viij  d. 

Item  he  charges  him  w'  xvj  Ti  for  ye  auld  ben       .  .  .  xvj  ll 

Item  ye  comptar  charges  himself  w*  ye  sowme  following  qlk  he  giftit  to  ye 

weOl  of  ye  pure  .  .  .  .  .  .  j*'  li 

Item  ressauit  for  ye  mort  claithe  of  velvet  pteining  to  ye  deacones  in  the  first 
fra  Patrik  Bar  .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Item  fra  James  Hamiltoune  proueist  about  M''  Gabriell  Maxwell.  x  li 

Item  left  to  ye  hospitall  in  legacie  be  M''  Dauid  Weymis    minister    for    ye 

mortclaithe      .....  xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  ye  mortclaithe  to  ye  guid  wyf  of  Cardonald  .  .  iiij  ll 

Suma  .....  j<=lxix  H  ij  s. 

Suma  of  the  comptars  haill  chairge  extendis  to 

vij'^.xiiij  li  vij  s.  iiij  d. 

Followes  the  comptars  dischairge  and.  exonera'une. 

Item  ye  comptar  dischargis  himself  of  ye  zeirlie  anuell  addettit  to  M''  Johne 
Howiesoune  abouespeit  ye  tme  of  Mertimes  1614  and  Witsounday  1615 

ijcxl  li 

Item  ye  first  quarter  being  Hallow  qr'  four  in  niiber  in  ye  hospitall  being  ye 
puir  yin  .......  xxvll 

Item  onlie  thrie  in  ye  hospitall  at  Candilmes  .  .  .  xx  li 

Item  for  W™  Clogeis  winding  scheit  ....        xxiiij  s. 

Item  for  his  kist  ......         xxix  s. 

Item  to  the  thrie  pure  men  in  ye  hospitall  ye  Beltan  quarter  xx  li 

Item  for  ye  thrie  pure  and  twa  was  putt  in  to  yame  in  all  ye  Lambmes  qr' 

xxx  li 

Item  for  peittis  and  coillis  to  ye  pure         .  .  .  .  ix  ll 

Item  twa  pair  schone  to  Symone  Baird      .  .  .  .  -xl  s. 

Item  to  ye  quarreo'^  for  stanes  to  lay  ye  foir  sink  .  .  xvj  s. 

Item  to  ye  cairter  for  leiding  yairof  ....  xxx  s. 

Item  m  to  ye  cairter  for  vj  draucht  stanes  leiding  .  .        xxiiij  s. 

Item  to  ye  deacone  of  ye  wrychts  in  arlis  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Item  to  him  for  ye  haill  workmaschipe  of  ye  hospitall  wrocht  at  ye  wry'  craft 

xlvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  George  Louk  for  ane  trie  to  brydill  ye  window  and  careing  yof  to  ye 
hospitall  ......  xiij  s.  viij  d. 


i6i5]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


67 


me 

xlH. 

xiij  s. 

iiij  d. 

iij  s. 

xiij  s. 

iiij  d. 

iiij  tl 

XV)  s. 

V  s. 

XXXV  s. 

iiij  d. 

XX  s. 

iijs. 

iiij  d. 

• 

xij  s. 

xiiij  s. 

vll 

viij  d. 

. 

vj  ll 

xij  s. 

Hi]  s. 

iiij  d. 

Item  for  fiftie  ane  daills  to  Andro  Haddowie  and  Michaell  Browne 

Item  to  ye  cairter  for  taking  vp  yof 

Item  for  sand 

Item  for  twa  laid  of  lyme 

Item  for  sawing  ye  daills 

Item  for  ane  laid  lyme 

Item  for  sawing  of  cuttis  of  fir 

Item  for  grit  naillis 

Item  to  j-e  cairter  for  cairing  yairof 

Item  for  four  laid  of  sand  and  ane  schule 

Item  to  ye  quarreo""  for  aucht  plane  staes  and  ane  lang  stane 

Item  for  twa  stane  half  stane  caik  leid  and  vpbringing  yairof 

Item  to  ye  sklaitters  for  ix  dayes  wark 

Item  to  ane  ma  to  serwe  him         .... 

Item  to  Andro  Haddowie  for  ]''  sklaittis  foge  and  pinis    . 

Item  to  Thomas  Norvell  for  half  hundrethe  sklaittis  ane  laid  of  sand  and  careing 

yof  to  ye  work  ......      xxxiiij  s. 

Item  for  v'=  naillis  ......         xxix  s. 

Item  for  tymer  and  careing  yairof  to  ye  work  1613  geistis  v  li  iiij  s. 

Item  to  Adame  Scott  for  naills  and  gurrownes  v<=  naillis    .  .      xxxiiij  s. 

Item  to  Willia  Sympsone  for  ane  geist       .  .  iij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  twa  spars  and  careing  yairof  and  ye  geist  to  ye  work  xxx  s. 

Item  to  Adame  Scott  for  ijc  naills  .  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Item  for  iij'^  grit  naills 

Item  for  iiij<=  small  naills    . 

Item  for  sand 

Item  to  Patrik  Bell  for  daills  xiij  in  niaber 

Item  to  Adam  Scott  for  v"^  naills  . 

Item  for  iiij''  naills  bocht  in  ye  meat 

Item  to  Adame  for  vij"  fylloring  naills 

Item  to  ye  sawers  for  sawing  ix  daills  and 

Item  for  leid  to  Johne  Morisoune 

Item  for  bands  to  ye  dure 


and  careing  yairof   ix  ll 


Item  twa  laid  of  lyme 
Item  four  laid  of  sand 
Item  to  Adame  Scott  for  naills 


ane  trie 


XXIU]  s. 

XX  s. 

xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xxx  s. 

xxxvj  s. 

xiij  s. 

xxx  s. 

xlviij  s. 

viij  s. 

X  s. 

viij  s. 

ix  s. 


Item  to  ye  sklaitter  for  sklaitting  ye  last  twa  windowes  for  viij  grit  sklaitts 
fog  and  j'^  naills  ten  dayis  work  in  all  .  .  vij  tl  xv  s. 

Item  for  naills        .  .  .  •  •  •  .     x  s.  viij  d 

Item  for  careing  vp  twa  wainscott  ye  pryce  yairof  and  twa  knappell 

xj  ll  xvj  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  jc  naills    .  .  .  .  •  .  •  vs. 

Item  to  Thomas  Norvell  for  sklaitts  .  .  .  Iiij  s.  iiij  d. 


68 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1615 


Dekin 

conveinars 

discharge. 


Item  to  ye  ma  kust  ye  hous  w'  lyme  .  .  .  .  xx  s. 

Item  to  Johne  Stewart  for  ye  haill  masoun  work  .  .  .  xlix  1i 

Item  to  Johne  Rankein  for  four  fut  of  riging  stae  .  .  xx  s. 

Item  to  \V™  Lyndsay  smythe  for  window  bands  and  naills  xxviij  s. 

Item  to  Johne  M<=Kewin  for  fir       .  .  .  .  .  vj  ti 

Item  vmqie  Johne  Trumbill  in  Hamiltoun  ferme  qlk  he  hes  not  payet  of  ye 

anuell  rent  about  M^  Jo"  Howiesoune  .  .       iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  aucht  elne  ane  qrt  fie  to  James  Fleming  not       .  .  .  v  11 

Item  to  George  Scott  paintof  .  .  .  .  .    (  ) 

Item  Hew  Blair  addetit  in  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  not  payet  qlk  aucht  to  be  resarfet 

vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  restand  of  ye  xxvj  li  ix  s.  iiij  d.  of  ye  auld  rentall  deutie  contenit  in  charge 

q^'of  y  is  not  vse  of  payment  as  zit     .  .  iij  1  iiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  ye  clerk  for  his  fie  .  .  .  .     vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  ye  offi''  Matho  Ker  fie        .  .  .  .  .  iiij  ll 

Item  wyne  to  M"'  Jo"  Howiesoune  at  divers  tymes  sen  vp  to  him  xiij  % 

Item  ye  velvet  mort  claithe  vj  elnis  of  velvet  ilk  elne  at  xv  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  inde 

Ixxxxiii)  li 
Item  for  ye  fas  and  silk  and  vnce  and  drop  wecht  of  all  is  xxvj  li  xij  d. 
Item  sax  elne  of  bukasie  to  lyne  ye  samyn  .  .  .  iiij  ll 

Item  ye  beising  of  ye  fas  .....  xxij  s. 

Item  the  vj  elne  of  buckra  to  cover  ye  samy  is      .  .  .  iij  ll 

Item  for  coper  and  ane  pund  leid  to  ye  sink  .  .  .  xxij  s. 

Item  thrie  elne  and  ane  qr'  of  taffatie  to  be  ane  ben  at  ten  merk  the  elne  is 

xxj  ^  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  ye  silver  to  be  ye  freinzie      .  .  .  .  .  vj  ll 

Item  ye  silk  yairto  .....  Iiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  making  ye  ben  and  fas    .  .  .  .  .  xxx  s. 

Suiiia    of   the   haill    dischairge  .  .     vij<=lxxix  ll  iiij  s. 

The  said  day  James  Fischer  deacone  convenar  haill  deacones  of  ye  said 
burghe  and  yair  counsell  convenit  for  ye  tyme  haueing  hard  the  said  Patriks 
compt  charge  and  discharge  abouewrittin  they  all  in  ane  voice  admittit  and 
allowit  and  be  j'ir  pntis  admitt  allow  and  approve  ye  samyn  in  all  pojmtis. 
Lykeas  thay  be  yir  pntis  exoner  and  simpir  discharge  the  said  Patrik  of  his  intro- 
missioune  foirsaid  w*  ye  haill  guids  geir  and  debts  perteining  to  ye  craftis 
hospitall  fra  Michaellmes  jajvjc  fourtein  zeiris  to  Michaellmes  jajvjc  fyftein 
zeiris  be  yir  pntis  for  euir  and  becaus  ye  comptars  charge  and  discharge  being 
conferit  he  is  fund  superexpendit  the  sowme  of  thrie  scoir  four  pund  sextein 
schilling  aucht  penneis  thairfoir  the  saids  deacones  and  yair  counsell  ordanes 
the  said  James  Fischer  pnt  deacone  convenar  mak  him  pay'  of  ye  said  sowme 
of  ye  first  and  reddiest  of  y''  said  hospitalls  rent  and  his  intromissioune  yairwith 
qlk  salbe  allowit  to  him  at  ye  making  of  his  compt  q^'vpoun  ilk  ane  of  yame 
askit  actis. 


i6i6]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  69 

The  said  day  the  said  Patrik  Maxwall  dischargit  ye  haill  deacones  of  y^  craftis 
quarter  comptis  the  saids  tvva  zeiris  yat  he  hes  bein  deacone  convenar  be  yis  y^[^  <^frter 
pnt  act  for  euir.  comptis. 

Item  the  said  Patrik  delyverit  ye  velvet  mortclaithe  \vt  ye  cover  yairof  Mortciaithe 
the  ben  and  thrie  keyis  of  ye  box  to  ye  said  James  Fischer  pnt  deacone  convenar  delyverit.  ' 
qlks  keyis  war  delyverit  be  him  to  ye  said  Patrik  Johne  Scott  and  Adame 
Ritchie  to  be  redely verit  be  yam  in  judgment  befoir  ye  deacones  at  ye  nixt 
electione  of  ye  deacone  convenar. 

Item  ye  deacone  convenar  and  deacones  hes  destinat  and  appointtit  the  xx  lib.  gevin 
sowme  of  twentie  punds  money  to  be  gevin  to  Hew  Blair  in  satisfactioune  of 
ye  wrytts  he  maid  betui.K  yame  and  M''  J01  Howiesoune  to  be  payit  to  him 
be  ye  deacone  convenar  of  ye  first  of  ye  rent.  Lykeas  they  haue  exonerit 
and  dischargit  ye  said  Hew  of  ane  grund  anuell  of  ten  merks  money  addettit 
be  him  zeirlie  to  ye  craftis  hospitall  of  all  zeiris  and  tmes  preceiding  Mertimes 
jajvjc  fyftein  zeiris  and  he  is  to  mak  thankfull  pay*  yairof  in  tyme  cuming. 

The  said  day  Johne  Boill  sone  to  vrnqi^  Robert  Boill  in  Glasgow  is  buikit  Prenteis  Boiii. 
heirin  as  he  quha  is  bund  prenteis  to  Michaell  Baba  cordoner  conformc  to  the 
indento''  maid  betuix  yame  yairanent  of  ye  dait  the  (  )  day  of 

(  )  1614  zeirs. 

The  said  day  Robert  Dennestoune  is  buikit  heirin  as  he  quha  is  bund  Prenteis 
printeis  to  William  Andirsoune  cordoner  conforme  to  the  indento''  sett  downe 
betuix  ya  yi'anent  q^-  enterit  at  Mtimes  1614  zeiris. 


Deonestoun. 


The  said  day  Gawane  Massoune  sone  to  James  Massoune  in  Halhill  is  Prenteis 
buikit  as  printeis  to  James  Mayne  wry'  be  his  indento""  of  ye  dait  ye  fourtein     ^'^^oun. 
day  of  December  1614  zeiris  to  serwe  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeiris  fra  ye  dait 
of  ye  said  indento^. 

The  said  day  Pitir  Bar  is  buikit  as  he  quha  was  printeis  to  vmq'^  Archibald  Prenteis  Bar. 
Cleiroche  tailzeo''  burges  of  Glasgow  conforme  to  yair  indento''  of  ye  dait  ye 
xxiij  day  of  Apryll  161 1  zeiris  bund  to  serwe  fyve  zeir  as  printeis  and  ane  zeir 
for  meitt  and  fie. 

The  said  day  Johne  Dogleische  sone  to  Andro  Dogleische  in  Dauidstoune  Prenteis 
is  buikit  as  he  q^^  is  bund  printeis  to  Michaell  Dogleische  taDzeo"^  conforme  to     °^  '^'^'^  ^' 
ye  indento^  sett  downe  betuix  yame  yairanent  of  ye  dait  ye  xij  day  of  October 
1611  conforme  to  ye  act  and  ordinace  y'  all  ye  auld  printeiss  sould  be  buiket. 

Decimo  Maij  1616. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  deacones  of  Glasgw  and  y  counsell  Complaint 
being  convenit  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  about  ane  complaint  gevin  in  be  Ro*  anentVo-^BeU 
Bell  wricht  aganis  James  Mayne  deacone  of  yc  wrichtis  allegeand  that  he  had  ^"'^  ^''^  '"*"• 


70  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1616 

dischairget  him  work  and  to  hald  ane  servand  as  gif  he  war  not  ane  friema  w' 
ya  qlk  beand  red  the  deacone  alia'  that  he  was  not  frie  to  work  at  ye  wricht 
craft  in  respect  of  ane  act  alle'  subscryvit  be  him  in  y  buik.  Thairfoir  ye 
deacone  convenar  and  deacones  ordanes  him  to  produce  ye  said  act  and  ye 
said  Ro'  to  bring  his  servand  and  ane  dischairge  of  his  indento'  and  service 
wt  his  last  maist  in  ye  New  Kirk  the  xv  day  of  Maij  instant  and  ye  haill  deacones 
wnit  now  to  y'  effect. 

Acty'yepuir  The  Said  day  it  being  trj'et  that  Johne  Glen  and  all  his  consortis  quha  ar 

hospitaii  beg     in  ye  hospitall  sustenit  be  ye  deacones  beggit  fra  Capita  Wode  contrair  ye  actis 

dyke.^^"^  ^^       maid  of  befoir  and  Jo"  Leygatt  was  sein  drunkin  in  ye  way  thairfoir  ye  said 

deacone  convenar  and  deacounes  statutis  and  ordanes  that  na  of  ye  persounes 

sustenit  in  y  hospitall  be  fund  begga  or  drunkin  heireftir  and  in  cais  yai  do  in 

ye  contrair  they  to  be  absolutlie  depryvet  and  putt  out  of  ye  hospitall  for  euer. 

Decimo  quinto  Maij  1616. 
Ro'Watsone  The  Said  day  the  deacone  convenar  deacones  and  y  counsell  convenit 

decermt  in  ten    .  tt         rr-  ,       i  -.^    *  x^  „         •■  •   ,     ■  ,  ,  .  ,  ■  ,    • 

pund  of  in  ye  New  Kirk  about  Ro*  Bell  and  ye  wrichtis  to  tak  ordor  w'  his  complaint 

"™  *"'"  the  deacone  convenar  inquyret  of  Ro'  Watsoun  deaco  of  ye  flescho''s  q*  was  ye 

caus  yt  he  payet  not  his  quart  comptis  and  offt"'s  iie  the  said  Ro'  anseret  the  devill 
ane  penny  qi'  he  had  done  w*  his  service  for  na  ma  was  present  and  proceiding 
farder  in  his  contempt  he  said  the  offir  durst  not  putt  his  poynd  to  be  compryset 
and  mony  ma  superiluus  words  qi'for  James  Braidwod  baillie  ye  haill  deacones 
and  y  counsell  decernit  ye  said  Ro*  in  ten  pund  of  vnlaw  to  ye  weill  of  ye  pure 
and  to  be  wardit  during  ye  deacone  convenars  will. 

Decimo  Augustj  1616. 

Decreit  aganes  The  Said  day  ye  deacone  convenar  and  deacones  \v'  y  counsell  convenit 

absoivitur.  ^01"  Y^  tyme  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  in  ye  caus  betuix  ye  wrychts  and  Ro'  Bell 
they  all  in  ane  voice  fand  ^e  said  Ro'  aucht  not  to  mak  ane  new  say  as  yai 
craifit  him  to  do  becaus  he  is  ane  frieman  buiket  w'  yame  and  becaus  he  onlie 
payet  xx  mks  of  vpsett  of  befoir  they  ordane  him  to  pay  to  his  said  craft  ten 
mks  to  mak  out  xx  li  of  vpsett  and  fywe  mk  to  be  drunkin  w'  his  brethering 
of  craft  and  he  to  remajme  w'  yame  friema  in  tym  cuing  bot  ony  impediment. 

Octavo  Octobris  1616. 

Lytis  for  ye  The  said  day  the  said  deacone  convenar  haill  deacones  and  y  counsell 

conv'eiuar.  being  convenit  in  ye  hospitall  to  elect  twa  persounes  of  ye  craftis  rak  to  be 
pntid  to  ye  counsell  of  yis  burghe  w''  ye  auld  deacone  convenar  that  be  woittis 
ane  of  ye  thrie  may  be  electid  deaco  convenar  for  ye  zeir  to  cum  qlk  being 
deulie  voittit  conforme  to  y  ordinar  forme  James  Lichtbodie  maltma  and  Jo° 
Padie  skynner  is  nominat  and  chosin  be  yame  be  pluralitie  of  voittis  to  be 
pntid  on  lyte  to  ye  counsell  of  yis  burghe  w'  ye  auld  deacone  convenar  that 


i6i6]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  71 

ane  of  ye  thrie  may  be  voittit  and  chosin  deacone  convenar  for  ye  zeir  to  cu 
and  ye  lyttis  to  be  gevin  in  be  Gabriell  Lystoun  and  Ro'  Watsoun  deacones  of 
y  callings. 

Dccinio  qiiinto  Odobris  1616. 
The  said  day  James  Fischer  being  chosin  in  counsell  deacone  convenar  Deikin 
for  ye  zeir  to  cum  nominat  his  counsell    viz    Johne    Scott    deacone    of    ye  counsdlf^* 
hemirme  Gawa  Neisbit  deaco  of  ye  tailzeoi's  Gabriell  Listoun  deacone  of  ye 
cordoners  Johne  Zoung  deacone  of  ye  baxters  Jo"  Baird  deacone  of  ye  wobsters 
David  Scherar  deacone  of  ye  coupers  Ro'  Watsoun  deacone  of  ye  flescheo''s 
George  Bogill  deacone  of  ye  skyners  Johne  Boyd  deacone  of  ye  masounes 
Patrik  Colquhoun  deacone  of  ye  WTichtis  W™  Govane  deacone  of  ye  bonnet- 
makers  Andro  M}-lne  deacone  of  ye  ch>Turgianes  Waltir  Douglas  visito''  of  ye 
maltmen  and  meilme  Robert  Rowatt,  baillie,  James  Braidwod  Thoas  Morsoun 
Patrik    Maxuall    Ninia   Andersoun    Alex""   Cauldwall   Thomas   Fawsyde    Jo° 
Stirling  W°»  Neilsoun  elder  Jo°  Craufurd  maltma  Jo"  Padie  skynner  Thomas 
Achissoun   W™  Howie  litster  Ro'  M^Cure  tailzeo^  W""  Andersoun  cordoner 
\Vm  Wilsoun  tailzeo'  James  Lichtbodie  maltma  George  Mure  mariner  and 
W™  Stalker.     Lykeas  out  of  ye  niiber  abouewrittin  be  pluralitie  of  voittis 
James  Braidwod  Patrik  Maxuall  Ninia  Andersoun  and  Thomas  Morsoun  ar 
nominatt  and  appointtit  to  be  vpoun  ye  deane  of  gilds  counsell  to  Michaelmes 
nixtocu  161 7  zeirs  to  be  pntid  to  ye  deane  of  gild  be  ye  deacone  convenar  and 
counsell  abouenaet  suorne  yis  day  and  ressauit  in  dew  forme. 

Nono  Novembris  1616. 
The  said  day  James  Fischear  deacone  convenar  haill  deacounes  of  yis  Deikin 
burghe  and  y  counsell  ordiner  convenit  in  ye  hospitall  for  heiring  of  ye  deacone  compt.""  '^'* 
convenars  compt  of  ye  crafts  ret  fra  Michaelmes  1615  to  Michaelmes  1616 
zeiris  he  producit  his  compt  chairge  and  dischairge  as  followes  in  pticular. 

Chairge. 
Item  in  ye  first  the  comptar  chairgis  himself  w'  ye  craftis  new  rental!  extendmg 
to        .  .  .  .  .  .  i'^lij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  wt  ye  craftis  auld  rentall  extending  to  .  xxvj  1i  ix  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  awad  be  Hew  Blair  few  anuell  Witsounday  and  Mtimes  tmes  1615 

vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  Jo"  Dobbie  ye  saids  tmes  his  few  deutie  .     vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij'd. 

Item  M''  Ro'  Herbiesoun  his  few  deutie  ye  sds  tmes  iiij  li  xs.  iiij  d. 

Item  3'e  proffeitt  of  ye  haill  money  dontit  be  M''  Jo"  Howiesoun  ye  sds  tmes 

extends  to       .  .  .  .  .  ij<=xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  w'  ye  deutie  of  ye  rentall  of  ye  bak  almoushous  ta  vp  sumty  be  James 
Lennox  .  .  .  .  .  .  v  ll  xiiij  s. 

Item  w'  James  Bateis  rentall  .  .  .  .       v  ll  xij  s.  viij  d. 

Suma  .....        iiij'^xlij  ll  viij  s. 


72 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1616 


Item  ye  compiar  chairges  himself  w'  ye  fywe  mks  and  vj  s.  rcssavit 
be  him  at  ye  enterie  of  burgess  fra  Michaelmas  1615  to  1616  foirsaid. 


Item  in  ye  first  fra  Allane  Andersoun 

vjs. 

Item  fra  Eliazer  Hamiltoune 

vjs. 

Item  fra  Mathow  Wood     . 

vjs. 

Item  fra  Dauid  Millaris  sone 

vjs. 

Item  fra  W"  Somervell 

vjs. 

Item  fra  Manasses  Layll     . 

xlvj  s. 

Item  fra  Mathow  Ballantyne 

vjs. 

Item  fra  Johne  Bornis 

iij 

ll  vj  s. 

viij  d. 

Item  fra  Patrik  Speir 

"i 

ll  vj  s. 

viij  d. 

Item  fra  George  Mure 

vjs. 

Item  fra  Johne  Fynlay 

ii) 

ll  vj  s. 

viij  d. 

Item  fra  James  Baba 

iij 

ll  vj  s. 

viij  d. 

Item  fra  Johne  Hamiltoune 

iij 

ll  vj  s. 

viij  d. 

Item  fra  Thomas  Scheirar 

vjs. 

Item  fra  Robert  Rid 

vjs. 

Item  fra  Mungo  Hamiltounes  guid  sone     . 

xlvj  s. 

Item  fra  Finlay  Schankschawes  gude  sone 

xlvj  s. 

Item  fra  Johne  Ingram      .... 

vjs. 

Item  fra  Johne  Kirkwood 

vjs. 

Item  fra  Margaret  Cawie  hir  guid  ma 

vjs. 

Item  fra  James  Pollok        .              .              .              .             . 

iij 

ll  vj  s. 

viij  d. 

Item  fra  James  Conall        .... 

vjs. 

Item  fra  James  Hendersoune 

iij 

ll  vj  s. 

viij  d. 

Suma 

. 

XXX  iii; 

ll  ij  s. 

viij  d. 

Item  ye  compiar  charges  himself  w^  ye  gifiit  money  to  ye  puir 
ressauit  be  him  fra  ye  persoiines  cflirmentionat. 
Item  fra  Niniane  Loclirig  . 
Item  fra  Johne  Pady 

Item  fra  Gabriell  Listoune  .  .  .  vj  ll  xiij  s. 

Item  fra  Gabriell  Conynghame 
Item  fra  James  Stewart  for  ane  wrang 
Item  fra  M''  James  Clarkis  mother 

Suma  ....         iij^^xiiij  ll  iij  s. 

Item  ye  comptar  chargis  himself  w'  ye  silver  for  ye  mortclaithe 
receavit  be  him  fra  ye  psounes  following. 
Item  fra  M"'  Dauid  Hayis  wyf        .  .  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Item  fra  Andro  Luif  ......  iiij  ll 

Item  fra  James  Gilmo''       ......  iiij  ll 

Item  fra  Thomas  Kirkwood  .  .  .  .  .  xl  s. 


XX  ll 

iiij  ll 

iiij  d. 

xls. 

xlH 

XXX  s. 

iiij  d. 

i6i6]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


73 


fra  Willia  Muir 

xls. 

fra  James  Biscattis  wyf 

xls. 

Ira  Johne  Scot 

xls. 

fra  Johne  Buntein     . 

xls. 

fra  Andro  Fary 

xls. 

fra  Johne  Boyidis  wyf 

xls. 

fra  Dauid  Hogiszaird  and  his  wyf 

iiij  ll 

fra  Johne  Milleris  wyf 

xl  s. 

fra  Manasses  Lyll 

xls. 

fra  ye  laird  of  Gervestoune   . 

vj  % 

Sunia 

xxxviij  ll 

Suiha  of  ye  comptars  haill 

chairge 

is 

v<:lxxxviij  li  xiiij  s. 

Item 

Item 
Item 
Item 
Item 
Item 
Item 
Item 
Item 
Item 


Followes  the  comptars  discharge. 
Dischairge. 

Item  the  comptar  discharges  himself  of  ye  sowmes  following  debursit  be  him 

to  ye  craftis  vse. 
Item  to  ye  puir  men  in  the  hospitaU  .  .  .  v^j^^x  ll 

Item  for  collis  and  peittis  to  yame  .  .  .  xiij  ll  x  s. 

Item  given  for  glas  bandis  to  ye  northe  windowis  .  iij  ll  xvij  s. 

Item  to  Adame  Elphingstoune  for  ye  glas  of  yame  .  vij  li  x  s. 

Item  to  his  man  in  drink  silver      .  .  .  .  iij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  wjme  tane  to  M"'  Johne  Howiesoune  at  sindrie  tymes  w*  ye  bailzie 

viij  ll 
Item  at  zo""  comandis  to  Hew  Blair  .  .  .  .  xx  ll 

Item  to  Johne  Wallace  in  drink  silver  for  sewing  ye  mortclaithe  xij  s. 

Vpone  ye  xvij  day  of  Januar  q°  M^  George  Sempill  gave  ye  v<=  merks  to  ye 

hospitall  in  Mathow  Trumbles  hous  with  ye  bailzie  and  sindrie  honest 

men  for  wyne  .  .  .  .  iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Vpone  ye  fourt  of  Apryill  at  zo"'  comands  to  Petir  Mony        iiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  to  George  Scott  for  panting  ye  hospitall        .  x  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  Patrik  Maxwall     .....        iijxxiiij  %  xvj  s. 
Item  for  wyne  q°  we  ressauit  ye  silver  fra  M''  George  Semple  and  payit  him  his 

anuell  to  Witsounday  1617      .....         xxvj  s. 
Vpone  ye  xiij  and  xiiij  dayis  of  Junij  q"  we  gat  ye  vj<=  li  fra  Johne  Colquhoune 

spendit  in  Jo°  Rowatis  with  the  proveist  bailzeis  and  sindrie  honest  men 

vj  li  X  s. 
Item  gewin  to  Johne  Colquhoune  for  annuell  of  money  to  Witsonday  qlk 

wilbe  gottin  in  againe  ....  xiiij  li  x  s. 

Item  to  ye  dean  of  gild  to  mak  yair  silver  gottin  fra  Johne  Colquhoune  equall 

w*  ouris  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  v  li 

Item  to  Jo°  Craig  for  making  Johne  Colquhounes  securiteis  iiij  ll  viij  s. 

Item  for  four  laidis  lyme  to  poynt  ye  hospitall       .  .  .         xviij  s. 


74  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1616 

Item  for  sex  laidis  sand     .  .  .  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Item  to  M''  Johne  Hutchesoune      .  .  .  vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  Thomas  W'ylie  for  claithe  to  be  Simot  Baird  claithis  xj  1l 

Item  to  Andro  Duncane  for  poynting  of  ye  hospitall  iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  Mathow  Fischer  for  his  hors  wage  and  intima^une  making  to  ye  Castel- 

milk  of  Jo°  Colquhounes  assigna^une  .  .  .  xx  s. 

Item  for  intima'une  making  to  W"  Watt  guid  ma  of  Law  and  W"  Bowie  of 

ye  samy  assignes  .  .  .  .  .  .  xv  s. 

V'pone  ye  xxviij  of  Junij  in  drink  silver  to  ye  men  bigit  ye  kirkzaird  dyke  in 

Cabuslang        .  .  .  .  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Item  for  twa  pair  schone  to  Symone  Baii'd  .  .  .        xlviij  s. 

Item  loisit  of  ane  double  ducat  gottin  fra  Maister  Johne  Howiesoune 

xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  for  ane  daill  nales  and  menis  wages  to  mend  ye  stairheid  xvij  s. 

Item  to  M''  Johne  Howiesoune  for  his  anuell  .  .  .  ij^xl  ll 

Item  ye  comptar  aucht  to  be  dischargit  of  ten  merks  for  ye  anuelrent  of  ane 

c  merks  awin  be  Thomas  Trumble  qlk  is  not  gottin         vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  to  Thomas  Wylie  for  ane  gowne  to  Johne  Scheirar    .  .  x  ll 

Item  to  Johne  Dalrimpill  elder  to  by  ane  pair  scheittis  and  sark 

iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  to  Mathow-  Ker  for  his  feall  .....  iiij  ll 

Item  ye  comptar  aucht  to  be  dischargit  of  yir  pticulars  vnderwrittin  being  non 

pay's 
Item  in  ye  first  in  Elizabethe  Ardinbuckles  hands 
Item  in  Angues  Steills  hands 
Item  in  George  Hutchesounes  hands 
Item  for  Bessie  Colvinis  waist 
Item  ye  barne  sted  ptening  to  Claud  Hamiltoune 
Item  in  Hew  Blairis  hands 

Item  for  ye  teind  borne     .... 
Item  in  Ninia  Gilhagis  hands 
Item  ye  barn  sted  in  Sanctenewis  gait  ptening  to  Mareoune  Scott  v  s. 

Item  Johne  Flemingis  hous  in  Briggait       ....  xxix  s. 

Suiha  of  ye  comptars  discharge  .  vj'^iiij  ll  ij  d. 

Deikin  Qlk  compt  abouewrittin  being  red  hard  and  considerit  the  saidis  haill 

h?s'dfschlr"e.  deacones  and  yair  counsell  convenit  for  ye  tyme  they  all  in  ane  voice  admittit 
and  allowit  ye  samj'n.  Thairfoir  they  haue  exonerit  and  dischargit  and  be  yir 
pnts  exoneris  and  simpir  discharges  the  said  James  Fischer  of  his  intromissioun 
w'  ye  craftis  guidis  and  debtis  abouewrittin  conforme  to  his  intromissioune 
yairwith  fra  Michaelmes  1615  zeiris  to  Michaelmes  jajvjc  sextein  zeiris  be  yir 
pntis  for  euir  becaus  the  said  James  be  yis  compt  abouewrittin  is  fund  super- 
expendit  the  sowme  of  fyftein  punds  vj  s.  viij  d.  qlk  they  ordane  to  be  payit 
of  the  first  of  his  intromissioune  w'  ye  craftis  guidis  and  geir. 


xs. 

xiij  s. 

XX  s. 

xij  s. 

xxiiij  s. 

•jH 

xiij 

s.  iiij  d. 
vs. 

iiij 

s.  vj  d. 

i6i6]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  75 

The  said  day  Johne  Clark  ane  agit  puir  man  is  ordanet  to  be  ressauit  in  ciark  ane  puir 
ye  craftis  hospitall  and  ane  gowne  to  be  givin  to  him.  hospitall.^ 

The  said  day  Waltir  Newlandis  sone  to  vmqi^  Mathow  Newlandis  of  Kippis  Prenteis 
is  builvit  heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to  Johne  Hebburne  cordoner  burges     ''^^  ^"  *' 
of  yis  burghc  conforme  to  ye  indento^  sett  downe  betuix  thanie  yairanet  of 
ye  dait  ye  fiftein  day  of  November  1615  zeiris  to  serwe  conforme  to  ye  ler 
of  gildrie. 

The  said  day  the  key  is  of  ye  bo.\  [are]  delyverit  to  Patrik  Maxwall  Johne  Bo.\  m's. 
Scott  and  Gabriell  Listoune  to  be  redelyverit  at  ye  ni.xt  electioune  of  ye  deacone 
conuenar. 

xiij  Novembris  i5i6. 

The  said  day  Gavvan  Wilsoune  Johne  Govane  James  Laurie  Thomas  Gairneris 
Dowgall  Johne  Kirkland  Johne  Duncanisoune  Johne  Wallace  Andro  Harvie  craftVs. ''' *'^* 
W^  Seller  George  Rallistoune  and  James  Wallace  compeirit  personallie  befoir 
ye  deacone  covenar  deacones  and  yair  counsell  in  the  crafts  hospitall  and  yair 
for  yameselfis  and  in  name  and  behalf  of  Johne  Manchane  Quintein  Rid  William 
Naper  Robert  Sprewll  Johne  Watsoune  and  Johne  Woddrow  all  gairneris 
burgess  of  yis  burghe  and  becom  actit  bundin  and  obleist  in  all  tyme  cuing  to 
content  and  pay  quarter  lie  tvva  schilling  ilk  persoune  befoir  noiat  at  Candlemes 
Beltan  Lambmes  and  Hallowmes  extending  to  aucht  schilling  ilk  persoune  in 
ye  zeir  for  ye  weill  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  and  puir  to  be  sustenit  yi'intill  as  being 
joinit  with  the  craftis  of  yis  burghe  and  to  be  of  yair  number  in  all  tyme  cuming. 
Lykeas  ye  said  Gawane  Wilsoune  is  choisin  to  tak  vp  yair  qrt  comptis  fra  ye 
dait  heirof  to  ye  nixt  electioune  of  ye  deacone  convenar  and  he  is  ressauit 
vpone  ye  deacone  convenaris  counsell  to  ye  nixt  electioune  and  hes  maid 
faithe  as  vse  is. 

The  said  day  Johne  Scott  deacone  of  ye  hemerme  becom  in  ye  deacone  Decreit  aganes 
convenaris  will  for  his  dissobedienc  done  to  him  in  y*  he  being  contramandet  ^''°  °'" 
be  ye  deacone  convenar  to  ressaue  Johne  Kirkwod  frieman  with  his  craft  and 
maid  him  ane  frieman  contrair  to  ye  said  comand  givin  to  him  be  ye  said 
deacone  covenar  for  ye  qlk  caus  he  is  decernit  and  ordanit  be  ye  deacones  and 
y  counsell  to  craif  ye  deacone  covenar  pardoune  and  to  pay  fywe  pund  of 
\-nlaw  qfof  thrie  pund  is  ordanit  to  be  givin  to  Edward  Pollok  skyner  and  fourtie 
schillingis  to  W™  Calderwode  saidillar  and  gif  ony  of  ye  deacones  of  yis  burghe 
dissobey  ye  deacone  convenaris  comand  in  tyme  cuming  in  ony  lau^'  matir 
concernis  y  craftis  ilk  contravenar  sail  pay  to  ye  weill  of  ye  puir  ten  pund  of 
vnlavv  toties  quoties  they  happin  to  contravein  and  in  cais  they  or  onie  ane  of 
yame  failzie  to  pay  y"^  qrt  comptis  within  xv  dayis  eftir  ilk  qrt  in  yt  cais  they 
ar  becom  actit  heirin  to  pay  ye  dowble  yof  quarterlie  sa  oft  as  they  failzie  in 
all  tyme  cuming  to  remaine  as  perpetual]  statutis  to  be  observit  be  ye  pnt 
deacones  and  yair  successores  in  office. 


76 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1617 


Prenteis 
VVodsydc. 


Prenteis  Or. 


Prenteis 
Hendrie. 


Act  anent  ye 
wobsters. 


Lytis  for  ye 

deikin 

conveinar. 


XV  Februarij  161 7. 

The  said  day  Johne  Wodsyde  sone  to  Johne  Wodsyde  in  Southana  is 
buikit  heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to  Charhs  Pollok  coup  conforme  to  ye 
indentor  sett  downe  betuix  ya  yairanet  of  ye  dait  ye  fiftein  day  of  Februar 
1615. 

The  said  day  Johne  Or  sone  to  {  )  Or  in  Gorballs  as  he  q* 

is  bund  printeis  to  Hew  Wat  cordoner  conforme  to  ye  indento""  sett  downe 
betuix  yame  yanent  of  ye  dait  the  (  )  day  of  (  ). 

xxviij  day  of  Maij  1617. 

The  said  day  Wilham  Hendrie  sone  to  W'"  Hendrie  in  Plaine  is  buikit 
heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to  Johne  Kirlie  zounger  wobster  burges  of  yis 
burghe  conforme  to  ye  indento^  sett  downe  betuix  yame  yairanet  at  ye  dait 
heirof. 

Decimo  octavo  Sep^s  1617. 

The  said  day  anent  ye  complaint  gevin  in  befoir  ye  deacone  convenar 
deacones  and  y  counsell  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  be  Ar**  Patirsoun  George  Scherelaw 
Alex''  Gemyll  and  sinderie  vthers  of  y  craft  aganis  Jo^  Clark  wobst  aganis  q"" 
yai  alleget  y*  ye  said  Johne  had  vset  seditioun  and  avyset  sinderie  of  ye  wobster 
craft  to  voitt  w'  him  y'he  may  be  deacone  for  ye  zeir  to  cu  q^vpoun  dew  tryell 
being  tane  be  ye  deaco  convenar  deacones  and  y  counsell  yintill  thay  for 
avoiding  of  all  sclander  of  y  allegeance  lies  thocht  meitt  and  haue  ordanet 
that  Jo"  Baird  deacone  of  ye  wobsters  sail  not  putt  ye  said  Jo"  \^oun  lyte 
yis  zeir  at  y  electioun.  Lykeas  yai  suspend  him  y^'fra  for  ane  zeir  to  cu  eftir 
yis  dait  and  haue  ordanet  ye  said  deacone  ressave  Ar<i  Patirsoun  ane  of  ye 
m's  of  his  craft  becaus  he  is  ane  speall  honest  ma  of  y  craft  and  to  putt  him 
vpoun  ye  lyte  at  ye  nixt  electioun  vnder  ye  paine  of  x  li  of  vnlaw  to  be  gevin 
to  ye  Weill  of  ye  pure  and  Ok  craft  is  ordanet  to  chuse  y  deacone  vpoun 
Settirday  nixt  the  twetie  day  of  Sep^  instat  vnder  ye  said  paine. 

Octavo  Octobris  1617. 
The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  and  deacones  w'  y  counsell  being 
convenit  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  for  electing  of  tua  psounes  of  ye  craftis  rak 
to  be  lyttit  w'  ye  auld  deacone  convenar  and  to  be  pntit  to  ye  counsell  of  yis 
burghe  of  Glasgw  that  ane  of  ye  thrie  micht  be  chosin  deacone  convenar  for 
ye  zeir  to  cum  and  being  removit  in  four  companeis  and  four  first  voittit  and 
yeftir  be  pluralitie  of  voittis  tua  voittit  out  of  ye  four  q''by  be  pluralitie  of 
voittis  Patrik  Maxuall  tailzeo^  and  Gabriell  Listoun  cordoner  is  ordanet  to  be 
vpoun  ye  lyttis  w'  James  Fischer  last  deacone  convenar  and  to  be  pntid  to  ye 
counsell  that  ane  of  ye  thrie  may  be  chosin  deacone  convenar  for  ye  zeir  to 
cum  to  be  pntid  be  Ninia  Andersoun  and  Thomas  Morsoun  conforme  to  ye 
ordo'  observit  zeirlie  y^anent. 


I6i7]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  77 

xxviif  Octobris  1617. 
The  said  day  Patrik  Maxuall  deacone  convenar  chosin  in  counsell  for  ye  Deikin 


convenars 


zeir  to  cu  hes  nominat  yir  persounes  following  to  be  vpoun  his  counsell  viz  counseii." 
Johne  Scott  deacone  of  ye  hcmirmen  James  Mitchell  deacone  of  ye  tailzeo^s 
Gabriell  Listoun  deacone  of  ye  cordoners  Alex^  Cauldwell  deacone  of  ye  skynners 
Jo°  Zoung  deacone  of  ye  Baxters  Johne  Baird  deacone  of  ye  wobsters  Ro' 
Watsoun  deacone  of  ye  flescheors  Patrik  Colquhoun  deacone  of  ye  wrichtis 
Johne  Rankein  deacone  of  ye  masounes  James  Scheills  deacone  of  ye  coupers 
Andro  Mylne  deacone  of  ye  chyrurgea  Johne  Smythe  deacone  of  ye  bonet- 
makers  Johne  Craufuid  visitor  of  ye  maltmen  and  meilmen  togidder  w*  Ro' 
Rowatt,  baillie,  James  Braidwod  James  Fischer  Waltir  Douglas  Ninia  Andersoun 
Thomas  Morsoun  David  Schcrar  VV"  Howie  litster  James  Lichtbodie  Thomas 
Fawsyde  Jo°  Stirling  W™  Neilsoun  elder  Jo"  Padie  skynner  Thomas  Achessoun 
George  Mure  mariner  James  Briscat  VV'"  Andersoun  W™  Neilsoun  zoungej 
and  George  Bogle  skyner  to  be  ressauit  ye  nixt  court  and  als  Gawa  Wilsoun 
gairner  nominat  on  y  counsell  for  ye  gairners. 

The  said  day  Johne  Mair  sone  to  W"  Mair  in  Drubowie  is  buiket  in  yis  ye  Pdnteis  Mair. 
deacone  convenars  bulk  as  he  q^  is  bund  printeis  to  Eliazer  Hamiltoun  skynner 
burges  of  Glasgow  conforme  to  his  indetor  of  ye  dait  ye  xviij  day  of  October 
instant  to  serve  conform  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie. 

The  said  day  Jo"  Roxburghe  sone  to  David  Roxburghe  mariner  buikit  Printeiss 
heirin  as  he  was  [?  wha]  is  bund  printeis  to  James  Gillespie  tailzeo""  burges  of     "'^  ™^  "' 
yis  burghe  be  his  indento^  of  ye  dait  the  xix  day  of  Apryle  1612  zeirs  to  serve 
conforme  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie  and  als  Ro'  Roxburghe  sone  to  ye  said  David 
is  buiket  as  he  q^  is  bund  printeis  to  Jo°  Leggatt  elder  cordoner  be  his  indento^ 
of  ye  dait  ye  xix  day  of  Julij  1616  to  serve  conforme  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie. 

The  said  day  Matho  Locheid  sone  to  Waltir  Locheid  in  Lochlibo*syd  is  Printeis 
buiket  heirin  as  printeis  to  Ro*  Watsoun  tailzeor  burges  of    Glasgw  be  his 
indentof  of  ye  dait  ye  first  day  of  Merche  ano  1614  q^  is  bund  printeis  for  ye 
space  of  four  zeirs  eftir  ye  dait  y^oi  conforme  y^to. 

The  said  day  Johne  Myller  sone  to  vmqi«    James    Myller    mariner    is  P""'^'* 
buiket  as  he  q^  was  printeis  to  Jo"  Steuart  bonnetmaker  burges  of  Glasgw  to 
serve  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeirs  be  his  indentor  daittit  ye  xvij  day  of  YcJ  1609 
zeirs  conforme  to  ye  act  and  ordinace  that  all  ye  auld  printeiss  sould  be  buiket 
heirin. 

The  said  day  Johne  Mair  sone  to  W™  Mair  in  Drubowie  is    buiket    as  Printeis  Mair. 
printeis  to  Eliazer  Hamilton  skynner  burges  of  Glasgow  to  serve  for  ye  space 
and  zeirs  appoynttit  be  ye  lettir  of  gildrie  be  his  indentof  of  ye  dait  ye  xviij 
day  of  October  1617.     [See  second  paragraph  above. 1 


78 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1617 


Printeis 
Allansoun. 


Four  persones 
on  ye  dean  of 
gild  bis 
counsel!. 


Deikin 

conveinar  his 
compt. 


The  said  day  Johne  Allansoun  was  buiket  heirin  printeis  to  Andro 
.Allansoun  maltma  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  for  ye  space  and  zeirs  appoynttit 
be  ye  lettir  of  gildrie  be  his  indento""  of  ye  dait  ye  xxij  day  of  August  1617 
conforme  to  \-e  act  and  ordinance  that  ye  auld  prenteiss  sould  be  buiket. 

Quinto  No's  1617. 

The  said  day  Patrik  Maxuall  deacone  convenar  and  remanent  deacones 
of  Glasgw  and  y  counsell  being  convenit  for  electing  of  four  persounes  of  ye 
craftis  rak  to  be  vpoun  ye  dean  of  gilds  counsell  for  ye  zeir  to  cii  to  ye  nixt 
electioun  and  being  all  removit  in  four  severall  companeis  eftir  \y^s  be  pluralitie 
of  voitts  James  Braidwod  Thomas  Jlorsoun  Ninia  Andersoun  and  Johne 
Craufurd  ar  electit  and  chosin  to  be  vpoun  ye  deane  of  gilds  counsell  the  said 
zeir  to  cu. 

The  said  day  ye  deacone  convenar  James  Fischer  maid  his  compt  of  ye 
craftis  rent  ptening  to  ye  hospitall  betuix  Michaelmes  1616  and  Michaelmes 
last  was  1617  be  the  qlk  compt  he  chairget  himself  w*  ye  auld  rentall  extending 
to  ane  hundrethe  fiftie  tua  pund  13  s.  iiij  d.  Item  w'  ye  auld  retail  qlk  is 
xxvj  li  ix  s.  4d.  Item  auchte  be  Hew  Blair  ten  ffik  be  Johne  Dobbie  te  mk 
be  M''  Ro*  Herbiesoun  four  pund  xs.  4d.  Item  w'  ye  deutie  of  ye  bak  almous- 
hous  sumty  tane  vp  be  James  Knox  qlk  is  vj  ti  iiij  s.  Item  w*  ye  retail 
vpliftit  be  James  Batie  qlk  is  v  ll  xvij  s.  Suma  twa  hundrethe  nyne  pund 
IS.  iiij  d.  Ite  he  chairget  himself  w*  ye  fywe  mk  and  vj  s.  ressauit  at  ye  making 
of  ye  burgess  extending  to  xxvj  li  vj  s.  viij  d.  and  als  w*  ye  giftit  money  to  ye 
pure  viz  Ite  Gabriell  Conygham  and  Jo"  Padie  v  ti  Item  left  be  vmq'^  Alia 
Watsoun  to  ye  said  hospitall  ten  ink  Item  giftit  be  W"  Howie  four  pund 
Item  left  in  legacie  be  vmqi^  Jo°  Dakimpill  mchant  ten  pund  Item  be  v-mqi* 
James  Bell  lait  bailzie  ten  pund     Item  be  \Tnq'^  Thomas  Lymburner  x.x  li 


Item  be  vmq'«  Abraha  Mure  mcheat  iiij  tl  Item  be  vrnq'^  Jo°  Andersoun 
bailzie  ten  mk  Ite  be  v-rnq'^  Johne  Raltoun  maltma  four  pund.  Suiiia  thrie 
scoir  ten  pund  vj  s.  viij  d.  Item  the  comptar  chairget  himself  w'  ye  money 
he  ressavit  for  ye  velvet  mortclaithe  fra  sinderie  psounes  conforme  to  his 
compt  extending  to  xxv  tl  vj  s.  viij  d.  Item  w*  ye  superplus  of  ye  daills 
twetie  merk  w*  ye  byrune  deuteis  obtenit  aganis  Johne  Fleming  his  sevin 
pund  xix  s.  6d.  and  als  w*  ye  bjTune  deuteis  addettit  be  Agnes  Steill  e.xtending 
to  xiij  s.  Item  w'  x.xxn^  s.  ressauit  fra  ye  gairners  of  y  deutie  extending 
togidder  to  xxiij  li  xv  s.  ij  d. 

Suifia  of  ye  comptars  haiU  chairge  extends  to  thrie  hundrethe 
fiftie  four  pund  xvj  s.  vj  d. 

And  as  to  ye  anuells  of  M'  Johne  Howiesoun  M'  George  Sepill  and  Jo° 
Colquhounes  silver  they  ar  payit  y  anuell  rents  y^v'  for  ye  zeir  to  cu  q'vpoun 
ye  deacone  convenar  hes  reportit  y  acquittances. 


i6i8]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  79 

Dischairge  and  exoneratioun. 

Item  ye  comptar  dischairges  himself  w'  ye  pticular  sowmes  of  money  Deikin 
deburst  be  him  to  ye  pure  in  ye  hospitall  y  sustenta~une  coills  claithe  to  be  y  d?scharg".  " 
gownes  and  allowet  to  him  restand  of  his  last  compt  xv  li  vj  s.  viij  d.  non 
paymentis  and  all  he  deburst  in  ye  craftis  necessar  effairs  and  adois  comptit 
and  allowet  be  ye  haill  deacones  and  y  counsell  his  dischairg  extending  in  haill 
to  thrie  hundrethe  fourtie  sax  pund  four  schilling  ten  penneis  q^intill  Hew 
Blair  is  gevin  vp  for  non  pay*  of  ten  fnk  Georg  Hutchesoun  for  non  pay*  of 
XX  s.  Bessie  Colveins  wast  for  xij  s.  j-e  barnsted  ptening  to  Claud  Hamiltoun 
for  xxiij  s.  the  teynd  borne  for  fywe  schilling  in  Ninia  Gilhageis  hands  vj  s. 
Mareoun  Scotts  borne  in  ye  Trongaitt  now  ptening  to  George  Hutchesoun 
V  s.  and  sua  ye  comptars  chairge  and  dischairge  being  conferat  the  compter 
restis  in  his  hands  aucht  pund  xj  s.  iiij  d.  qlk  yai  haue  ordanet  him  to  gif  to 
Waltir  Douglas  for  his  expenss  q°  he  raid  at  y  desyre  to  Dumbarta  conforme 
to  his  pticular  compt  mkit  and  subscryvit  be  ye  deacon  convenars  dark  in  y 
pns  and  gevin  out  to  him  and  yi'eftir  the  deacone  convenar  and  haill  deacones 
and  y  counsell  in  ane  voice  exoners  and  simpli  dischairgis  ye  said  James  Fischer 
of  his  intromissioun  w'  y  hospitall  ret  conforme  to  his  compt  chairge  and 
dischairge  contenit  y""intill  fra  Michaell  1616  to  Michaelmes  last  bypast  1617 
zeirs  be  yir  pntis  for  euer. 

xij  No's  1617. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  and  deacones  convenit  in  ye  craftis  Craftis  taxt. 
hospitall  for  y"'  necessar  adois.     Ilk  craft  is  ordanet  to  pay  alsmekill   to   ye 
deacone  convenar  as  y''  qrt  compts  betuix  and  ye  xiiij  day  of  No''  instant  for 
vpsett  of  taxt  money  pteand  to  ye  hospitall  be  consent  of  ye  haill  deacones. 

The  said  day  the  keyis  of  ye  box  gevin  to  Jo"  Scott  Gabriell  Listoun  Box  m's. 
and  Jo"  Craufurd  to  be  redelyverit  at  ye  nixt  electioun. 

The  said  day  Georg  Stirling   broy  to  Malcolme  Stirling  masoun  is  buiket  Printeis 
prenteis  to  James  Ritchie  masoun  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  for  ye  space  of  ^'"■''"S- 
aucht  zeirs  fra  ye  dait  of  his  indento^  qlk  is  daittit  ye  xiiij  day  of  Dec^  1612 
zeirs  conforme  to  ye  act  and  ordinace  that  all  ye  auld  prenteiss  sould  be  buiket. 


The  said  day  W™  Galbraithe  was  buiket  as  printeis  to  Waltir  Galbraithe  Printeis 
jeo"'  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  for  ye  ty  and  space  a 
of  gildrie  be  his  indent©''  daittit  ye  tent  day  of  No''  1617. 


tailzeo''  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  for  ye  ty  and  space  appoynttit  be  ye  lettir  ^^"''^""'• 


Quinto  Martij  1618. 

The  said  day  Jo"  Crichtoun  is  buiket  heirin  as  printeis  to  Michaell  Scott  Printeis 
wobster  burges  of  Glasgw  be  his  indento''  of  ye  daitte  heirof  to  serve  for  ye  ^'"■"^'"'^'"^• 
space  of  nyne  zeirs. 


8o 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1618 


Printeis 
Hervie. 


Printeis 
Wallace. 


Priateis 
M'Cleis. 


6  Maij  1618. 

The  said  day  Johne  Heme  was  buiket  as  printeis  to  Jo°  M\vr  tailzeo' 
burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  ye  ty  and  space  appoynttit  be  ye  lettir  of  gildrie 
be  his  indentof  of  ye  dait  heirof. 

The  said  day  Henrie  Wallace  is  buiket  heirin  as  printeis  to  Alex''  Cauldwell 
sky-nner  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  conforme  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie  be  his 
indentof  daittit  ye  ten  and  .w  day  of  Fe^  1618. 

xiij  Maij  161 8. 
The  said  day  Jo"  MCleis  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q»  is  bund  printeis  to  Hew 
Neilsoun  tailzeor  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeirs  be  his 
indentc  daittit  (  ). 


Printeis  The  Said  day  Rot  Wotherspune  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q^  is  bund  printeis 

Wotherspune.  ^^  j^j^gg  Qorbett  tailzeo'  to  serve  him  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeirs  be  his  indento' 
daittit  ye  xx\nj    day  of  Apryle  1618. 


Printeis 
Angus. 


XX  m^k  gewin 
to  Boddie. 


zx  s.  gewm 
to  Ros. 


Printeis 
Gemmyll. 


xxvj  Maij  1618. 
The  said  [day]  Jo°  Angus  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to  W" 
Watsoun  flescheo"'  callit  capita  and  is  bund  to  serve  him  printeis  ye  space  of 
sevvin  [years]  be  his  indentor  sett  doun  betuix  ya  y'anent  of  ye  dait  heirof. 

The  deacone  convenar  deacones  and  y  counsell  being  convenit  in  ye 
craftis  hospitall  vpoun  ye  xxvj  day  of  Fe^  1618  to  heir  ane  suppHca'ne  gevin 
in  to  yame  be  Patrik  Boddie  tailzeo'"  Abirdea  they  ordanet  ye  deacone  convenar 
to  give  to  him  twetie  mk  for  his  supplie  to  be  allowet  in  ye  deacovenars  compt 
and  wald  give  na  m  becaus  he  haid  na  testimonial!  of  his  distres. 

The  deacones  ordanet  Harie  Ros  to  haue  .xx  s.  q"  yai  war  farder  advyset 
qlk  ye  deacone  convenar  gave  to  him.  This  was  done  in  ye  hospitall  ye  xxiij 
day  of  Maij  1618. 

The  said  day  Johne  Gemyll  sone  to  Alex''  Gemyll  wobst  is  buiket  heir  as 
he  q"  is  bund  printeis  to  James  Culane  tailzeC  burges  of  Glasg\v  to  serve  for 
ye  space  of  sevin  zears  be  his  indentof  of  ye  dait  ye  secund  day  of  Maij  1618. 


XXV  Junij  1618. 
Printeis  The  Said  day  Thomas  Hannay  sone  to  \nTiqie  James  Hannay  smyth  is 

Haiinay.  buiket  heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  for  ye  space  of  nyne  zeirs  to  Rit''  Kirkland 

wobster  burges  of  Glasgw  be  his  indento''  daittit  ye  xj  day  of  Maij  1618. 

Quarto  Aug''  1618. 
PffSfnta-un  The  qlk  day  the  deacon  convenar  and  deacones  being  convenit  in  ye 

Hammiltoun  ,  •     ,  ■      n       .   -  ,,    ,  .  !•      .•  •      ■      ^ 

to  ye  bursarie.  craftis  hospitall  w'  y  counsell  for  ye  tyme  anent  ye  supplicatioun  gevin  m  to 


i6i8]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  8i 

yame  be  Johne  Hamiltoun  sone  lau"  to  vmq'»  Abrahame  Hamiltoun  maltm5 
burges  of  Glasgw  makand  metioun  that  q'  he  had  lairnet  his  haill  gramer 
and  was  reddie  and  habell  to  go  to  ye  coUedge  to  be  ane  student  yi'in  at  Godis 
pleasof  and  in  respect  he  haid  no  meanes  to  sustein  him  y''intill  his  {ay^  being 
depairtit  and  his  moy  pure  craifand  y^foir  humlie  y  pntatioun  of  y  burssarie 
is  in  y  handis  and  at  y  gift  and  presenta'un  qlk  being  hard  be  yame  they  all 
in  ane  voice  ordanet  pnta"un  to  be  maid  and  gevin  to  ye  said  Johne  of  bursarie 
to  be  pnted  to  ye  prin"  and  regentis  of  ye  Colledge  of  Glasgw  at  Michaelmes 
nixt  that  he  may  be  admittit  y''to  being  fund  qualifeit  be  ya  and  in  cais  he 
be  not  qualifeit  to  be  reportit  bak  that  ane  vy  qualifeit  psoun  may  be  presentit 
be  yame  to  bruik  ye  place  of  ane  brusso''  in  ye  said  colledge. 

The  said  day  James  Leischma  being  challengit  be  Jo°  Scott  deacone  of  Decreit  aganes 
ye  Smyths  for  his  misbehavior  vsit  be  ye  said  James  towards  his  deacone  in  LeUchman. 
miscalling   him    maist    schamfallie    and   presing   him   on   his   kneis   the   said 
James  being  accusit  y^'vpoun  became  in  j-e  deacone  convenar  and  deacounes 
will  qa  ordanet  him  to  sett  doun  on  his  kneis  at  ye  croce  and  his  awin  hous  and 
crave  God  and  ye  deacone  pardoun  for  his  offence. 

The  said  day  Patrik  Raiff  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q^  is  bund  printeis  w*  Jo°  Printeis  Raiff. 
Speir  tailzeo''  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  him  sevin  zeirs  be  y  indento""  daittit 
ye  xiij  day  of  Apryle  1618  zeiris. 

Vigesimo  Octavo  Aug*'  1618. 
The  deacone  convenar  deacones  and  y  counsell  being  cSvenit  in  ye  craftis  Act  anent 
hospitall  they  be  pluralitie  of  voittis  ordanet  that  na  psoune  of  na  craft  nor  eiecUoun^f^ye 
y  assisters  w'in  yis  bur'  sail  haue  ony  voitt  to  ye  electing  of  y  deacones  at  ye  decons. 
nixt  electioun  q*  hes  not  satisfeit  all  byrunes  addettit  be  ya  to  ye  contributioun 
to  ye  pure  sik  as  gave  vp  y  names  y''foir  allanarlie  and  vnles  yai  pay  ye  samy 
the  deacones  is  heirby  dischairgit  to  ressaue  y  voittis  at  ye  said  nixt  electioun 
as  said  is  onlie. 

The  said   day  Patrik    Maxuall  deacone    [convener]  hes  dischargit  Patrik  Deikins 
Colquhoun  wricht  Alex''  Cauldwall  skyner  Johne  Scott  hemyrma  Jo"  Craufurd  yair  quarter 
visitor  Andro  Mylne  chyrurgia  Jo°  Baird  wobst  Jo°  Rakein  masoun  Jo°  Zoung  ':°'"p"s- 
baxt  and   Thomas    Ritchie   cordoner   deacones  of  y''  craftis  and   ilk  ane  of 
yame  of  y  four  qrt  comptis  last  bypast  viz  Hallowmes  Candilmes  Beltane  and 
Lambmes  1618  becaus  yai  haue  payet  him  y'for. 

Nota  ye  said  Thomas  Ritchie  payet  ye  last  thrie  qrts  y'"of  and  vmq'" 
Gabriell  Listoun  ye  first  qrt  allanerlie. 

The  said  day  Jo"  Rodger  is  buiket  heirin  as  printeis  to  Jo"  Rodger  masoun  Printeis 
burges  of  Glasgw  his  fay  to  serve  him  fra  yis  dait  ye  space  and  zeirs  appoynttit  °  ^'^'^' 
be  ye  lettir  of  gildrie. 

F 


82 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1618 


Printeis 
Kirkwod. 


Printeis 
Currie. 


Act  aganes 
Clark  and 
Schirilaw. 


Act  aganes 
Birscatt  and 
Herriot. 


Auld  printeis 
Colquhoun. 


Lyttis  for  ye 

deikin 

conveinar. 


The  said  day  Ro*  Kirkwod  sone  to  vmqi^  Thomas  Kirkwod  flescheo'' 
is  buiket  heirin  as  printeis  to  Andro  Colquhoun  tailzeC  burges  of  Glasgw  to 
serve  sewin  zeirs  be  his  indentC"  daittit  ye  xx  day  of  August  1618. 

The  said  day  Alex''  Currie  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to  W™ 
Finnie  tailzeo"^  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeirs  conforme 
to  his  indento""  of  ye  dait  the  saxt  day  of  Merche  1618  zeirs. 

xvj  Sep's  1618. 
The  qlk  day  the  deacone  convenar  deacones  and  y  counsall  being  covenit 
in  ye  craftis  hospitall  anet  ane  complaint  gevin  in  befoir  yame  be  George 
Scherelaw  wobst  aganis  Jo"  Clark  wobster  q^'by  ye  said  Georg  complenit  that 
he  miscallit  him  calling  him  mainsuorne  and  als  that  he  strave  to  be  deacone 
qlk  being  tryet  befoir  j'ame  they  fand  that  yai  baithe  miscallit  vy''s  and  war 
trubilsum  persounes  to  y  craft  in  respect  q^'of  yai  statute  and  ordanet  that 
they  sould  baithe  be  putt  aff  lyitt  to  be  deacone  and  nane  of  ya  sould  be 
ressavit  be  y  deacone  and  mi's  of  y  craft  for  ye  zeir  to  cu  qlk  is  intimat  now 
to  ye  deacone  that  yai  be  not  putt  on  lyte  be  him  nor  zit  ane  maist  of  craft 
be  y  deaco  to  be  chosin  and  to  be  intimat  at  y  electioun. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  deacones  and  y  counsell  being  convenit 
in  ye  craftis  hospitall  for  sindrie  of  y  adois  they  ordanet  that  James  Briscatt 
tailzeo"'  and  W"  Heriot  baxt  sould  baithe  be  putt  aff  lyitts  be  y  deacones  that 
yai  be  not  deacones  als  yai  sould  not  be  ressauit  be  ye  deacones  to  be  chosin 
maisters  of  y  craftis  for  ane  zeir  to  cii  and  farder  during  ye  deacones  wills  and 
yis  act  buiket  and  insert  heirin  at  comand  of  Patrik  Maxuall  deacone  convenar 
as  being  done  in  absence  of  ye  clerk. 

Octavo  Octobris  1618. 
The  said  day  Alex''  Colquhoun  is  buiket  heirin  (be  ye  deaco  convenars 
warrad  conforme  to  ye  auld  act  and  ordinace  that  ye  auld  printeiss  was  not 
buiket  sould  be  zit  buiket)  as  printeis  to  Georg  Browne  flescheo''  conforme  to 
his  indento''  q*  was  bund  to  serve  conforme  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie  and  q^  was 
buiket  as  his  printeis  in  y  craftis  bulk  conforme  to  his  enterie  vpoun  ye  xxij 
day  of  Sep""  1601  zeirs. 

Decimo  quarto  die  mensis  Octobris  1618. 
The  said  day  Patrik  Maxuall  deacon  covenar  deacones  auld  and  new 
and  y  counsell  covenit  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  for  nominatting  twa  psounes  of 
ye  craftis  rak  to  be  on  lyte  wt  ye  said  Patrik  to  be  pntid  to  ye  counsell  of  Glasgw 
that  out  of  ye  thrie  the  deacone  covenar  may  be  chosin  they  first  voittit  sax 
persounes  being  removit  equallie  in  sax  copanies  and  y^eftir  be  pluralitie  of 
voittis  Ninia  Andersoun  and  Waltir  Douglas  is  ordanet  to  be  Ivttit  to  ye  effect 
foirsaid  to  be  pntit  to  ye  counsell  be  Thomas  Morsoun  and  Johne  Padie  con- 
forme to  ye  ordinance  contenit  in  ye  lettir  of  gildrie. 


i6i8]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  83 

Decimo  quinto  die  mensis  Octohris  1618  in  ye  Blakfreir  Kirk. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  Patrik  Maxuall  chosin  for  ye  zeir  to  Deikia 
cum  nominat  yir  psounes  following  to  be  vpoun  his  counsell  viz  Gabriell  coSnsdL"^^ 
Smythe  hemirma  Thomas  Gray  tailzeof  Thomas  Ritchie  cordoner  VV"  Neilsoun 
zounger  visito"'  Alex""  CauldwoU  skynner  David  Scherar  coup  Ar^  Patirsoun 
wobst  James  Allansoun  wricht  Jo°  Steuart  masoun  Willia  Watsoun  flescheor 
Matho  Glen  baxt  Mitchell  Spens  bonnetmaker  Jo°  Hall  chirurgia  deacones 
Gawa  Wilsoun  for  ye  gairners  togidder  w'  James  Braidwod  Ro'  Rowatt  James 
Fischer  Thomas  Morsoun  Ninia  Andersoun  Waltir  Donglas  James  Ly'bodie 
Ro*  Watsoun  James  Dunca  Jo°  Craufurd  W™  Howie  Thomas  Achissoun 
Thomas  Fawsyde  Jo°  Padie  Georg  Bogle  Jo°  Sterling  Jo"  Luif  skynner  Georg 
Mure  W™  Andersoun  James  Mitchell  Jo°  Scott  Andro  Mylne  W^"  Neilsoun 
elder  q^'  being  pnt  maid  faithe  de  fideli  administra' ne  in  y  office.  Lykeas 
the  foirsaids  haill  peisounes  being  putt  furthe  in  four  cumpaneis  that  out  of 
ilk  rak  ane  psoun  micht  be  voittit  extending  to  four  in  number  to  be  vpoun 
ye  dean  of  gilds  counsell  for  ye  zeir  to  cu  they  in  ane  voice  haue  nominat  and 
appoynttit  James  Fischer  Thomas  Morsoun  Ninia  Andersoun  and  Waltir 
Donglas  four  of  ye  craftis  rak  to  be  vpoun  ye  deane  of  gilds  counsell  q" 
Michaelmes  nixtocQ  to  be  pntid  to  ye  dean  of  gild  be  ye  deacone  covenar 
conforme  to  ye  ordo^  contenit  in  ye  lettir  of  gildrie. 

The  keyis  of  ye  box  delyverit  to  Gabriell  Smythe  Thomas  Ritchie  and  Box  m's. 
W"  Neilsoun  to  be  delyverit  at  ye  nixt  electioun  of  ye  deacone  covenar  in 
pns  of  ye  deacones. 

The  said  day  George  Bogle  is  appoynttit  collecto''  for  all  ye  craftis  for  Coliecto' 
ingaddering  of  ye  contributioun  to  ye  pure.  Bcgie. 

The  said  day  James  Pettigrew  is  buiket  heirin  as  printeis  to  Thomas  Printeis 
Ritchie  cordoner  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeLrs  fra  his     ''"'s^^^^- 
enteric  qlk  was  at  ye  dait  of  his  indentor  qlk  is  of  ye  dait    ye  sevint  day  of 
October  161 1  zeirs  conforme  to  ye  laitt  act  and  ordinace  that  all  auld  printeiss 
sould  be  zit  boukit. 

The  said  day  Andro  Hamiltoun  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  Printeis 
to  ye  said  Thomas  Ritchie  to  serve  him  fra  ye  dait  of  his  indento^  qlk  is  his  "a'«miltoun. 
enteric  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeirs  conforme  y^'to  qlk  is  of  ye  dait  ye  xxj  day  of 
Mai]  1617  zeirs. 

The  said  day  Johne  Corsbie  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to  Printeis 
Mongo  Hamiltoun  cordoner  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  for  ye  space  of  sewin     °^^  "^' 
zeiris  conforme  to  ye  indento'  sett  doun  betuix  yame  y^'anent  qlk  was  his 
enteric  y''to  and  is  of  yc  dait  ye  xvj  day  of  Maij  1618  zeirs. 


Pincartoun. 


84  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1618 

PrinteisAiia..  The  Said  day  Gilbert  Alii  is  buiket   heirin   as  printeis  to  Ro«  Leggatt 

cordoner  burges  of  Glasgw  be  his  indentor  of  ye  dait  ye  fourt  day  of  No^  1611 
to  serve  for  sewin  zeirs  fra  his  enterie  qlk  was  at  Mtimes  ye  said  zeir  and  that 
becaus  of  ye  auld  act  and  ordinace  sett  doun  anet  ye  buiking  of  auld  printeiss. 

xj  De's  1618. 
Printeis  Syde.  jhe  said  day  James  Syde  sone  to  vmq'e  Jo^  Syde  in  Elderslie  [is]  buikit 

heirin  as  printeis  to  Georg  Scherelaw  wobster  be  his  indento'  of  yis  dait  to 
serve  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeirs. 

X  FC^'  1619. 

Printeis  The  Said  day  Alia  Pincartoun  sone  to  James  Pincartoun  in  Coittis  is 

buiket  heirin  as  printeis  to  James  Pincartoun  cordoner  to  serve  for  sewin 
zeirs  fra  his  enterie  qlk  was  of  ye  dait  of  ye  said  indento''  and  twa  zeir  for 
meitt  and  fie  qlk  is  of  ye  dait  ye  aucht  day  of  Fe''  1619. 

Printeis  Bogle  The  said  day  Malcolme  Bogle  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q"'  is  bund  printeis 

w'  Georg  Andersoun  cordoner  to  serve  conforme  to  ye  lettir  of  gildrie  be  his 
indento^  sett  doun  betuix  ya  y''anet  of  ye  dait  the  xxvij  day  of  No^  1618. 

xxvj  Februarij  1619. 

Printeis  Mure  The  Said  day  David  Mure  is  buiket  heirin  as  printeis  to  W™  Lyndesay 

smythe  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeirs  fra  his  enterie 
qlk  was  at  ye  dait  of  ye  said  indento'  qlk  is  daittit  ye  said  xxvj  day  of  Fe'' 
1619. 

xiij  Maij  1619. 

Decreitaganes  The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  and  deacones  haifing  mett    in  ye 

alnmpie.  hospitall  anent  ane  complaint  maid  be  Thomas  Gray  deacone  of  the  tailzeCs 
aganis  Jo°  Dalrimpill  tailzeo'  for  misvsing  and  miscalling  him  in  jugmet  they 
all  in  ane  voice  fand  him  in  ane  grit  wrang  for  his  contempt  and  decernit  him 
to  pay  ten  punds  to  ye  weill  of  ye  pure  his  buithe  windo  to  be  steikit  vp  and 
to  be  wairdit  q"  ye  samy  be  payet  and  y'eftir  at  ye  meat  croce  to  sitt  down 
vpoun  his  kneis  and  craif  God  and  his  deacone  and  haill  craft  pardoun  and 
q"  ye  samy  be  done  he  to  haue  no  friedome. 

Secundo  Jitnij  1619. 

Printeis  Reid.  The  said  day  Johne  Reid  sone  to  Pitir  Reid  sawer  is  buiket  heirin  as  he 

qa  is  bund  printeis  to  Jo°  Reid  armorar  to  serve  sevin  zeir  conforme  to  his 
indento''  daittit  ye  tent  day  of  Apryle  1619. 

Printeis  The  Said  day  Thomas  Myller  printeis  to  Jo"  Wallace  tailzeo''  is  buiket 

heirin  to  serve  fywe  zeir  conforme  to  ye  indento''  daittit  ye  xiij  day  of  Apryle 
1619. 


i6i9]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  85 

The  said  day  James  Lyill  sone  law''  to  Andro  Lyill  in  Dintraithe  is  buiket  Printeis  Lyill. 
heirin  as  printeis  to  Manasses  Lyill  skynner  burges  of  Glasgw  his  broy  as  he 
q»  is  bund  to  serve  him  sewin  zeir  printeis  and  twa  zeir  for  meitt  and  lie  con- 
forme  to  his  indentC  of  ye  dait  ye  xix  day  of  Maij  1619. 

Decimo  tertio  Ociobris  1619. 
The  said  day   Patrik   Maxuall  deacone  convenar  haill  deacones  and  y  Lytis  fur  ye 
counsell  being  convenit  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  for  electing  and  nominatting  convemar. 
tua  psounes  of  ye  craftis  rank  to  be  on  lyte  w'  ye  said  Patrik  to  be  pntid  to 
ye    counsell    of    Glasgw    that    out  of    ye    thrie    the    deacone    covenar    may 
be  chosin  for  ye  zeir  to  cu  they  first  voittit   sax    persounes   being   removit 
equallie  in  sax  companeis  and  ye  sax  being  removit  James  Braidwod  and 
James  Lichtbodie  ar  lyttit  be  pluralitie  of  voittis  to  ye  effect  foirsaid  and 
ordanet  to  be  pntid  to  ye  counsell  of  ye  said  burghe  be  Ninia  Andersoun  and 
Thomas  Morsoun  coup  conforme  to  ye  ordnance  contenit  in  ye  lettir  of  gildrie. 


The  said  daj'  Johne  Wilsoun  sone  naturall  to  Jo°  Wilsoun  cordoner  is  Printeis 
buiket  heirin  as  he  q^  is  bund  printeis  to  James  Leggaitt  cordoner  for  ye  space  ^  '^°"«- 
of  thrie  zeirs  conforme  to  indento''  of  ye  dait  the  sewint  day  of  Maij  1618. 


xiiij  Octobris  1619. 
The  said  day  James  Braidwod  chosin  deacone  covenar  for  ye  zeir  to  cii  Four  persones 
being  convenit  in  ye  Trongait  Kirk  for  electing  of  four  persounes  of  ye  craftis  ^g^fdj^^ 
rak  to  be  vpoun  ye  dean  of  gilds  counsell  for  ye  zeir  to  cu  he  and  remanent  counsell. 
of  ye  deacones  of  ye  said  burghe  and  y  counsell  be  pluralitie  of  voitts  electit 
and  nominal  Waltir  Douglas  Thomas  Morsoun  Ninia  Andersoun  and  Thomas 
Achissoun  to  be  in  ye  dean  of  gilds  counsell  for  ye  zeir  to  cu  and  to  be  pntid 
to  him  be  ye  deacone  convenar. 

xxj  Oct's  1619. 
The  said  day  James  Braidwod  deacone  convenar  covenit  in  ye  New  Kirk  Deikin 
and  electit  and  nominat  yir  persounes  following  to  be  vpoun  his  counsell  viz  counsell. 
Johne  Stirling  deacone  of  ye  hemyrmen  James  Mitchell  deacone  of  ye  tailzeo^'s 
Mungo   Hamiltoun   deacone  of  ye.  cordoners   Waltir   Douglas  visito''  Matho 
Glen  deacone  of  ye  baxters  Jo°  Steuart  deacone  of  ye  masounes  Andro  Snype 
deacone  of  ye  coupers  Jo°  Padie  deacone  of  ye  skyners  Patrik  Colquhoun 
deacone  of  ye  wrichtis  W™  Fultoun  deacone  of  ye  bonnetmakers  Ro'  Watsoun 
deacone  of  ye  flescheo^'s  Johne  Hall  deacone  of  ye  chirurgia  W™  Kirkland 
deacone  of  ye  wobsters  Thomas  Herbiesoun  visito"'  of  ye  gairners  togidd"" 
w'  Patrik  Maxuall,  bailzie,  Ro'  Rowatt  James  Fischer  Thomas  Morsoun  Ninia 
Andersoun   David  Scherar   James   Lichtbodie   Andro   Mylne   James   Duncan 
Jo°  Craufurd  Georg  Mure  Thomas  Achissoun    W™  Howie    Jo°  Luif    Alex'' 
Cauldwoll  W™  Neilsoun  zounger  Georg  Bogle  Jo"  Scott  zounger  q*  being  pnt 
maid  faithe  as  vse  is 


86 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1619 


Box  m's. 


Bogle 
coUecto'. 


Lykeas  ye  keyis  of  ye  box  gevin  to  Mungo  Hamiltoun  Jo"  Padie  and 
Waltir  Douglas  to  be  redelyverit  at  ye  nixt  electioun. 

Decimo  No^s  1619. 

The  said  day  James  Braidwod  deacone  convenar  and  deacones  w'  y 
counsell  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  for  ingaddering  of  ye  craftis  guids  ptening  to 
ye  said  hospitall  thrie  being  lyttit  Georg  Bogle  is  appoynttit  collector  to  ye 
nLxt  electioun  all  in  ane  voice  q^  acceptit  ye  samy  and  to  be  comptable  to 
ye  deacone  covenar  and  deacones  at  Michaelmes  nixt  and  to  deburs  to  ye  pure 
and  for  y  adois  according  as  he  is  directit. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convener  and  deacones  being  convenit  ye  said 
day  anent  ane  complaint  maid  be  ye  coupes  vpoun  James  Scheillis  about  ye 
electioun  of  y  deacone  in  jugmet  Jo^^  Smythe  gave  James  Scheills  ane  ley 
and  he  falsefeit  ye  offir  q^vpoun  yai  being  challegit  for  ye  wrag  submittit 
yameselfs  to  ye  deacones  and  y^foir  yai  decerne  ye  said  James  in  ane  vnlaw 
of  thrie  pund  and  ye  said  J  on  Smythe  in  xl  s.  money  to  be  payet  to  ye  collecto'' 
for  ye  weill  of  ye  puir  and  Patrik  Maxuall  bailzie  intponit  his  au"<=  to  yis  y 
decreit. 

Discharge  The  Said  day   Patrik   Maxuall  exonerit  and   dischairget   ye  visitor  and 

"^uarter"' '""   ^^^^  deacones  of  yis  burghe  of  y  quarter  comptis  ye  tmes  of  Hallowmes  1617 
comptis.  Candilmes  Beltane  and  Lambes  ano  jajvjc  auchtein  zeirs  becaus  yai  haue 

maid  him  compleit  pay'  y^oi  ye  said  zeir  be  yis  pnt  act  sett  doun  y^anent. 


Decreit  aganes 
Scheills  and 
Smy'. 


Prenteis 
Telpheir. 


Prmtcis  Luif. 


Decriet  aganes 
Johne  Smy'. 


Octavo  De^s  1619. 

The  said  day  Hew  Tailzefeir  is  buiket  heirin  as  printeis  to  William 
Lyndesay  smythe  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeiris  fra 
his  enteric  qlk  was  at  ye  dait  of  his  indentor  the  said  secund  day  of  De""  1619. 

Septimo  Ja'^'  1620. 
In  ye  hospitall  ye  collector  ressauit  fra  James  Scheillis  xl  s.  for  his  vnlaw 
qlk  ye  deacone  covenar  and  deacoes  pnt  acceptit. 

xiiij  Ja">  1620. 
The  said  day  Willia  Luif  buiket  heirin  as  he  q^*  is  bund  printeis  to  William 
Luif  hemyrma  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeiris  conforme 
to  ye  indento""  sett  doun  betuix  ya  y^anent  ye  dait  of  yis  pnt. 

In  ye  hospitall  xxj  Ja">  1620. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  and  deacones  convenit  in  ye  craftis 
hospitall  anent  ane  complaint  maid  be  Williame  Fultoun  deacone  of  ye  bonnet- 
makeris  to  ya  vpoun  Jo°  Smythe  for  calling  him  nislett  deacone  and  his  dochter 
begger  and  hures  gett  and  mony  ma  vnculie  speiches  cleirlie  provin  and  that 


i620]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  87 

he  socht  to  stryk  his  deacone  q"  being  divers  tymes  covenit  to  comp  befoir  ya 

to  anser  to  ye  said  complaint  speciaUie  and  last  psallie  to  yis  day  he  dissobeyit. 

Thairfoir  the  said  deacone  convenar  deacones  and  y  counsell  all  in  ane  voice 

for  his  wrang  and  dissobedeance  decernis  ye  said  Jo°  Smythe  to  pay  ane  new 

vpsett  of  tuetie  pund  ye  ane  half  to  ye  hospitall  to  ye  weill  of  ye  pure  and  ye 

vy  half  to  his  craft  to  y  comoun  weill  and  ordanes  him  to  be  wardet  q"  ye  samy 

be  payet  and  yt  he  crave  God  and  ye  deacone  pardoune  for  his  offence  be  y 

sicht  and  appoyntment.     Lykeas  yai  haue  secludit  and  secludis  him  in  ty 

cuing  fra  being  deacone  as  vnwordie  to  bruike  office  yi'eftir  and  y'  he  be  not 

lyttit  without  y  warrad  to  yt  effect  in  ty  cuing,  and  Patrik  Maxuall  baillie  pnt 

intponit   his   auctie   to    yis    y    decreit    and   ordanes  ye  samy  to  be  putt  to 

executioun  w'  ye  toun  off''s. 

Patrik  Maxwell  bailie. 

The  said  day  Patrik  Maxuall  last  deacone  convenar  producit  his  compt  Chairge. 
chairge  and  dischairge  of  ye  haill  ret  belonging  to  ye  craftis  hospitall  fra 
Michaelmes  1617  to  Michaelmes  161S  qlk  was  fittit  comptit  and  laid  of  befoir 
vpoun  ye  Icist  day  of  Mtche  1619  and  allowet  and  now  ye  samy  is  ordanet 
to  be  buiket  w'  ye  last  zeirs  compt  qi'by  he  chairget  himself  w'  ye  craftis  qrtlie 
contributioun  extending  to  ane  hundrethe  fiftie  tua  pund  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  and 
als  wt  y  auld  rentell  extending  to  xxvj  i  ix  s.  iiij  d.  Item  he  chairget  himself 
w'  ye  f}-we  mks  and  vj  s.  ressauit  at  ye  enterie  of  ye  burgess  extending  to 
xxiiij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  and  als  ressauit  for  ye  mortclaithe  xxxij  ll  iij  s.  uij  d. 
Item  ressauit  fra  Jo^  Robiesoun  left  to  ye  hospitall  be  his  moy  xiij  li  vj  s.  vii]  d. 
Item  ye  few  deutie  bocht  fra  M'  Ro*  Allansoun  .xiij  s.  Item  w*  ye  few  dewteis 
addettit  be  Hew  Blair  and  Jo°  Debbie  extending  to  xx  mk  and  be  M^  Ro' 
Herbiesoun  iiij  li  x  s.  iiij  d.  Item  w'  ye  retail  of  ye  bak  almoushous  x  li 
vii]  s.  vii]  d. 

SuiTia    of     ye    comptars    haill    chairge    extendis    de    claro    to 
ii<=lxxvii)  ll  xiij  s.  8d. 

And  in  lyk  maner  ye  comptar  dischairget  himself.  In  ye  first  payet  for  Dischairge 
coillis  to  ye  pure  in  ye  hospitall  xj  ll  iij  s.  iiij  d.  Item  gevin  to  ye  pure  ye  said 
zeir  ijc  mks  Item  gevin  to  ane  stranger  callit  Patrik  Bodie  at  ye  deacones 
comand  extending  to  xx  mks  Item  gevin  to  Jo"  Glen  ye  offi''  1618  xx  s. 
Item  for  ye  hospitall  chynay  weyand  Lx  stane  sax  pound  wecht  xxij  ll  x  s. 
Item  for  ye  tyill  bak  xxxv  s.  Item  gevin  to  Ro*  Mure  for  making  ye  buird 
knappell  furmes  and  half  ane  daill  furnest  be  him  yno  vj  ll  xi]  s.  iiij  d.  Item 
for  tua  daills  and  ane  double  spar  yno  iij  li  ij  s.  viij  d.  Item  for  wyne  to  M' 
Joii  Howiesoun  iiij  li  xviij  s.  Ite  to  Symone  Baird  to  by  tua  pair  of  schone 
xl  s.  Item  gevin  to  Waltir  Douglas  xvj  li  Item  gevin  out  m  nor  ye  proffeit 
of  y  money  come  to  to  ye  persounes  giftit  ye  samy  to  ya  vj  ll  xuj  s.  uij  d.  to 
ye  clerk  of  fie  te  mks  to  Matho  Ker  offir  iiij  ll  Item  to  be  resavit  of  non  pay' 
of  ye  auld  retail  iiij  li  iiij  s.  iiij  d.     Item  not  payet  of  Ernoks  anuel]  xl  li. 


88  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1620 

Suma  of  ve  comptars  discharge  and  exonera~un  hard  and 
allowet  extends  de  claro  to  ij<=lxxvi  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Sua  chairge  and  dischairge  being  conferat  the  comptar  restis 
in  to  ye  deacones  xlvij  s.  vij  d.  qlk  being  payet  they  be  yis  pnt  act 
exoner  and  dischairg  him  simpli  of  ye  said  zeirs  compt  abouespeit. 

Chairge.  -j-fjg  gaid  day  the  said  Patrik  Maxuall  last  deaco  convenar  producit  his 

compt  chairge  and  dischairge  of  ye  haill  rent  belonging  to  ye  craftis  hospitall 
fra  Michaelmes  1618  to  Michaelmes  1619  qlk  followes  in  pticular.  In  ye  first 
the  comptar  chairges  himself  w'  ye  deacones  qrtlie  contributioun  qlk  is  y 
new  rentall  extending  to  ana  hundrethe  fiftie  tua  punds  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  Item 
w*  ye  auld  rentall  extending  to  xxvj  li  ix  s.  iiij  d.  Item  w'  Hew  Blair  and 
Jo°  Dobbeis  few  dewteis  extending  to  xx  iiik  w*  M''  Ro'  Herbiesounes  extending 
to  iiij  li  X  s.  iiij  d.  w'  ye  few  deutie  bo'  fra  M''  Ro'  Allansoun  xlij  s.  Item  w* 
ye  rentall  of  ye  tua  beds  of  ye  bak  almoushous  ten  pund  viij  s.  viij  d.  Item 
w'  XX  mk  left  be  vmqi«  Gabriell  Listoun  in  legacie  Item  for  ye  mortclaithe 
ressauit  fra  Alia  Napers  wyf  Hew  Neilsoun  for  his  gudmoers  buriall  fra  ilk 
ane  of  j-a  xl  s.  for  vmq'^  Ar'^  Seller  and  his  wyf  and  vmqi^  James  Mayne  v  ll 
xviij  s.  Item  he  chairges  himself  w'  ye  anuell  rent  of  vmqi^  M''  Jo"  Howiesouns 
money  extending  to  xxxviijc  mks  fra  Mtimes  i5i8  to  Mtimes  1619  extending 
to  ij^^liij  li  vj  s.  viij  d.  Item  w'  ye  fyve  mks  and  vj  s.  ressauit  at  y^  enterie 
of  ye  burgess  ye  said  zeir  gottin  in  xv  li  iiij  d.  Item  w'  ye  rest  of  his  last 
zeirs  compt  qlk  is  xlvij  s.  vj  d. 

Suma  of  ye  comptars  haill  chairge  extends  de  claro  to  v<=iij  I1 
ix  s.  vj  d. 

Dischairge.  And  in  lyk  maner  the  comptar  dischairges  himself  w'  ye  pticuiars  following 

debursit  be  him  as  followes  in  pticular.  Item  in  ye  first  debursit  for  coills 
ind  peitts  to  ye  pure  xj  li  xiiij  s.  iiij  d.  Item  gevin  to  ye  pure  in  ye  hospitall 
ye  said  zeir  sewin  scoir  xiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d.  Item  to  ye  coUedg  for  balding  y 
brusso'  Ixvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  Item  to  Ester  Colubie  for  hir  zeirs  deutie  Iiij  ll 
vj  s.  Item  to  Symone  Baird  iij  ll  iiij  s.  Item  for  ye  sadill  to  ye  hors  thais 
tua  zeir  bypast  tuetie  fhk  Item  for  Harie  Ros  gowne  xj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d  to 
Ro'  Makcur  Item  gevin  to  Eupha  Wilsoun  of  hir  anuell  Iiij  s.  iiij  d.  Item 
to  ye  clerk  for  his  fie  te  mk  and  to  ye  ofR'^  iiij  li  Ite  gevin  out  to  Mareoun 
Steuart  and  Bessie  Lyndesay  w'  Andro  Hay  ix  li  Item  to  Matho  Fischer 
to  chairge  Ernok  for  his  anuell  xxiiij  s.  Item  to  Andro  Dunca  to  mak  ye 
chymnay  bak  xj  s.  Item  gevin  to  Jo"  Glen  W"  Wotherspone  and  ane  vy 
pure  ma  at  ye  comad  of  ye  deacones  iij  li  xvj  s.  Item  non  pay'  of  ye  auld 
retail  and  bak  almoushous  in  ye  chairge  iij  li  iiij  s.  iiij  d.  Item  debursit  for 
Gilbert  Auldcornc  ye  last  half  zeir  befoir  M^  Jo°  Howiesounes  deceis  ten  ink 
Item  he  craifis  to  be  exonerit  of  Ernoks  anuell  rent  as  zit  not  gottin  in  nor 


i620]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  89 

introinettit  w*  be  him  is  Ixxx  ti     Item  of  ye  anuell  of  ye  sewin  hundrethe 
mks  prin"  qlk  he  payet  out  to  M^  Jo"  Howiesounes  brother  bairnes  is  Ixx  mk. 

Suma  of  ye  comptars  dischairge  and  exoneratioun  allowet   to 
him  extends  to  iiij'^lxxix  ll  xiiij  s.  viiij  d. 

Sua  his  chairge  and  dischairge  being  conferat  he  rests  auchtad 
in  to  ye  deacones  tuentie  thrie  pund  xiiij  s. 

And  yffoir  James  iiraidwod  pnt  deacone  convenar  and  haill  deacones  Deikin 
and  y  counsel!  covenit  lor  heiring  of  ye  said  compt  ordanes  ye  comptar  to  d'i'^chargit 
pay  the  collector  ye  said  sowme  restand  and  exoners  and  simpli  dischairges 
ye  said  Patrik  of  his  intromissioun  w'  ye  craftis  rent  the  saids  tua  zeiris  aboue- 
speit  be  yir  pntis  for  euir. 

Item  to  remember  that  ye  collecto''  ye  nixt  compt  salbe  answerabill  for  Act  anent 
ye  anuell  of  four  chovvsand  and  sax  hundrethe  and    fourti    mk    fra  Mtimes  coUecfo'.^ 
1619  to  Mtimes  1620  zeirs  in  the  qlk  he  sould  haue  allowet  to  him  ane  hundrethe 
fiftein  mks  debursit  be  him  to  Patrik  Maxuall  qlk  he  maid  vp  of  ye  prin" 
sowmes  comptit  and  laid  ye  said  day  abouespeit. 

Item  ye  collecto''  is  ordanet  to  tak  in  yir  sowmes  following  and  to  compt  Act  y  ye 
yrfoir  fra  Jo°  Steuart  for  ye  outwaill  daills  xx  ll  fra  Jo"  Colquhoun  of  his  ^°lader'ye 
broy^s  legacie  left  to  ye  hospitall  xx  ll  fra  Ada  Neills  exCs  of  legacie  ten  iiik  "aftis  rent. 
Item  restad  of  Gilbert  Auldcornes  anuell  te  ink     Item  Ernoks  anuell  thrie 
tmes  includad  Mtimes  tme  1619  zeirs  saxtein  punds  out  of  Thomas  Mures  land 
in  Briggait  tua  zeii  bypast  xx  s.  being  x  s.  ye  zeir     Item  to  craif  in  for  ye 
mortclaithe  fra  S""  James  Clelad  for  his  moyJ's  buriall  fra  Mynto  for  his  sone 
and  Ro*  Nap's  buriall  fra  ye  Lady  Hardgray  for  hir    husbands  buriall    fra 
Georg    Scott   for  ye  Ladie  Castelmilks  buriall  fra  M""  Ro'    Hamiltoun  for  his 
wyfs  buriall  fra  Matho  Colquhoun  for  Kilmurdeneis  buriall. 

The  said  day  David  Wilsoun  sone  to  M'  Willia  Wilsoun  minist  of  Craufurd  Printeis 
is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to  Jo°  Andersoun  cordoner  burges  W''^°""- 
of  Glasgw  to  serve  him  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeiris  fra  his  enterie  qlk  was  at 
ye  dait  of  y  indento''  qlk  is  daittit  the  xxvij  day  of  No''  1619  zeirs. 

xiiij  Martij  1620. 
The  said  day  Andro  Patirsoun  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q^  is  bund  printeis  Printeis  Andro 
to  Jo"  Rodger  wobster  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  him  sewin  zeir  printeis  fra  P'i'"'so"»- 
his  enterie  qlk  was  at  Mtimes  last  was  be  his  indento""  daittit    the    xiiij    day 
of  Merche  1620  zeirs. 

Tertio  Aprilis  1620. 
The  said  day  Jo°  Knox  sone  lau"  to  vmqi«  Jo"  Knox  burges  of  Renfrew  Printeis  Knox 
is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q»  is  bund  printeis  to  Johne  Knox  mariner  burges  of  '""'°«''- 


go  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1620 

Glasgw  to  serve  for  ye  space  of  sewiii  zeirs  fra  ye  dait  of  his  indento""  qlk  is 
of  ye  dait  heirof. 

Printeis  Blair.  jhe  said  day  Hew  Blair  sone  to  Ro'  Blair  in  Bogtoun  is  buiket  heirin 

as  he  qa  is  bund  printeis  to  Gabriell  Cochera  skyner  burges  of  Glasgw  be  his 
indento"'  of  ye  dait  the  tent  day  of  Februar  last  bypast  to  serve  conforme  to 
ye  appoyntment  in  ye  lettir  of  gildrie. 

XXV  Aprilis  1620. 
Printeis  The  said  day  James  Pollok  sone  naturall  to  Georg  Pollok  zounger  coup 

°  °^'  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q^^  is  bund  printeis  to  Georg  Pollok  elder  couper  to  ser\-e 

for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeirs  be  his  indento''  of  ye  dait  of  yis  pnt  act. 

xvij  Mai]  1620. 
Edward  The  Said  day  Edward  Pollok  is  ordanet  haue  tourtie  mk  be  zeir  quartlie 

to  have  ve        his  enterie  to  be  at  Belta  last  and  sua  to  indure  during  ye  deacones  will  and 
qiter  pay'.        qU  jt  ],£  dischairget  in  respect  he  is  agit  pure  and  blind. 

Kirlie  and  The  said  day  Johne  Kir  lie  and  Jo°  Leggatt  [are]  suspendit  fra  ye  hospitall 

sus^pendit.        during  ye  deacones  will  and  gif  ony  of  ye  rest  leif  out  ony  of  ye  giftit  money 
at  burialls  or  vyi'wayes  to  be  immediatlie  deposit  and  never  to  be  ressauit. 


Nono  Augustj  1620. 

Bogle  Kirlie  Willia  Bogle  w'  ane  consent  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  was    ressauit  be  ye 

ressauifmye    deacone  convenar  and  deacones  to  be  in  ye  craftis    hospitall  and  haue    ye 

hospitall.  benefeit  qrtlie  appoyntit  y''to  and  he  is  ordaet  to  do  ye  actis  and  guid  ordo'' 

his  enterie  for  ye  first  qrt  to  begyn  at  Candilmes  last.     Lykeas  vpoun  pitie 

they  admittat  and  ressauit  again  Jo°  Kirlie  and  Jo°  Leggatt  in  ye  hospitall 

to  ressaue  ye  Lambmes  qrt  and  gif  ony  of  ya  drink  out  of  ye  hospitall  it  is 

statute  and  ordanet  that  thai  salbe  suspendit  and  putt  furthe  y''of  fra  thyn 

furthe  for  euer  and  yis  act  intimat  to  ya  all. 

Vndecimo  Odobris  1620  in  ye  Blakfreir  Kirk. 
Lyttistobe  The  said  day  James  Braidwod  deacovenar  haill  deacones  new  and  auld 

w*in  \ds  burghe  and  y  counsell  being  convenit  for  electing  tua  psounes  to  be 
on  lyte  w*  ye  pnt  deacovenar  to  be  pntit  to  ye  counsell  of  yis  burghe  of  Glasgw 
that  out  of  ye  thrie  the  deacovenar  for  ane  zeir  to  cii  may  be  chosin  they 
electit  and  nominat  Thomas  Morsoun  and  James  Lichtbodie  be  pluralitie 
of  voittis  to  be  on  lyte  w'  ye  said  James  Braidwod  and  ordanet  Ninia 
Anderson  and  Johne  Padie  to  present  ye  lyttis  to  ye  toun  counsell  to  ye  effect 
foirsaid  at  ten  IWs  conforme  to  ye  ordinace  appoynttit  be  ye  lettir  of  gildrie. 

Duodecimo  Odobris  1620. 
ye  deane  of  The  said  day  Thomas  Morsoun  deacovenar  chosin  in  counsell  qi'  Michaelmes 

for^TC  craWs     ^^^^  ^^^  '^'^'^  deacones  of  yis  burghe  visito'  and  y  counsell  nominat  be  him 

patrt. 


i62ol        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  C.LASGOW.  91 

covenit  in  yc  tolbuithe  for  electing  of  four  psounes  of  ye  craftis  rank  to  be 
put  vpoun  ye  dean  of  gildis  counsell  q^i  Michaelmes  nixt  they  all  in  ana  voice 
be  voitting  in  dew  and  competent  forme  electit  and  nominat  Ninia  Andersoun 
Johne  Padie  James  Fischer  and  David  Scherar  to  be  pntid  to  ye  dea  of  gild 
to  be  placet  on  his  counsell  q"  ye  nixt  electioun  foirsaid  conforme  to  ye  lettir 
of  gildrie  and  ordo^  prescryvit  y^anent. 

Lykeas  the  said  deacone  covener  nominat  and  electit  the  haill  deacones  Deaconvenars 
viz  Ro'  Wilsoun  armorar  Rot  M<^Cure  tailzeor  Andro  Ker  cordoner  W"  Heriot 
baxt  Jo°  Clerk  wobst  M^  Ro*  Hamiltoun  docto""  of  medicein  for  ye  chyrurgiaes 
Jo°  Boyd  masoun  James  Allansoun  wricht  W^  Watsoun  flescheo''  Andro 
Snj'pe  coup  Johne  Padie  skynner  Johne  \\'allace  visito'  Mitchell  Spens 
bonnetmaker  Thomas  Herbiesoun  gairner  and  vv'  yame  Patrik  Maxuall,  bailzie, 
Ro*  Rowatt  James  Braidwod  Ninia  Andersoun  James  Fischer  Waltir  Douglas 
Jo"  Mitchell  David  Scherar  James  Lichtbodie  Johne  Stirling  W™  Neilsoun 
zounger  Alex''  Cauldwoll  Thomas  Fawsyde  Jo°  Craufurd  Georg  Mure  Thomas 
Achiesoun  W"  Howie  and  George  Bogle  Jo°  Scott  to  be  on  his  counsell  q" 
Michaelmes  nixt  q*  being  pnt  maid  faithe  de  fideli  admiiiistratione  and  to 
gif  faithfull  counsell. 

The  said  day  James  Broun  sone  to  James  Broun  indueller  in  Glasgw  is  Printeis 
buiket  heirin  as  he  q^  is  bund  printeis  to  Jo°  Walker  wobst  burges  of  Glasgw 
to  serve  sewin  zeirs  printeis  and  tua  zeir  for  meitt  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  y''to 
qlk  is  at  Mtimes  nixt  be  his  indento''  daittit  ye  aucht  day  of   October  1620 
instat. 

XXV  Octobris  1620. 

The  said  day  the  deacovenar  and  deacones  covenit  for  ye  tym  the  keyis  Box  m's. 
of  ye  box  delyverit  to  Jo^  Wallace  Jo°  Padie  and  Ro*  M^Cur  to  be  keipit  be 
ya  q"  Michaelmes  nixt. 

The  said  day  M''  Jo"  Hutchesoun  suorn  clerk  to  ye  deacovenar  according  Huchesone 
to  ye  ordor.  '^''^''■ 

Primo  No's  1620. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  and  deacones  in  ane  voice  exoners  Discharge 
and  dischairges  Hew  Blair  of  his  anuell  zeirlie  of  ten  mk  be  zeir  for  his  few  conv'einar 
deutie  ye  tua  zeirs  of  Patrik  Maxualls  compt  viz  all  tmes  preceiding  Mtimes  ^^^  BUa. 
iajvjc  nyntein  zeirs  and  to  pay  thakfulhe  the  said  few  maill  the  tme  of  Mtimes 
jajvic  nyntein  Witsounday  tme  last  by  past  and  zeirlie  and  tmelie  in  tym 
cQing  and  y^foir  Patrik  Maxuall  hes  allowet  to  him  of  ye  superplus  of  ye  last 
compt  the  said  xx  riiks. 

H.  Blair. 

The  said    day  Georg    Bogle  [is]  chosin  collecto''  fra  Michaelmes  last  to  Coiiecto' 
Michaelmes  nixtocu  1621  zeirs  and  to  compt  for  ye  haill  rentalls  on  ane.         °^  ^' 


92 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1620 


Printeis 
MyUer. 


Printeis 
Home. 


Printeis 
Galbraithe. 


Printeis  Mure. 


Printeis 
Merscheli. 


Prenteis 
Maxwall. 


Craftis  taxt 


The  said  day  Rob*  Myller  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  quha  is  printeis  to  James 
Rakein  masoun  as  he  q*  is  bund  to  serve  for  ye  space  of  ten  zeiris  fra  his 
enterie  qlk  was  at  ye  dait  of  his  indento''  qlk  is  daittit  the  xij  day  of  Merche 

1618  zeirs. 

xxj  No's  1620. 

The  said  day  Johne  Home  is  buikit  heirin  as  printeis  to  At^  Home 
wobster  burges  of  yis  burghe  to  serve  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeiris  be  his  indento' 
of  ye  dait  heirof  producit  at  ye  buiking. 

The  said  day  Waltir  Galbraithe  sone  to  Tho^  Galbraithe  in  Glasgw  is 
buiket  heirin  as  he  q^  is  bund  printeis  to  Jo°  Gillespie  tailzeor  to  serve  him 
sevin  zeir  printeis  conforme  to  ye  indeto'  of  ye  dait  the  xx  day  of  No^  1620 
zeirs. 

The  said  day  Jo°  Mure  sone  to  David  Mure  in  Glasgw  is  buiket  heirin 
as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to  Jo°  Patirsoun  wobst  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve 
sewin  zeiris  printeis  and  tua  zeir  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  enterie  qlk  is  at  ye 
dait  of  ye  indento'  sett  doun  betuix  ya  yi^anent  daittit  ye  aucht  day  of  October 
1620. 

The  said  day  Johne  Merschell  sone  to  Matho  Merschell  incheant  is  buiket 
heirin  as  he  q*  is  bundin  printeis  to  Jo°  Mitchell  elder  tailzeo''  burges  of  Glasgw 
to  serve  sewin  zeiris  conforme  to  his  indento''  of  ye  dait  ye  nynt  day  of  October 

1619  zeirs. 

Decimo  Feb"'  1621. 

The  said  day  James  Maxuall  sone  to  Arf*  Ma.xuall  in  Aikinheid  is  buiket 
heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to  Johne  !Maxuall  zounger  flescheo"'  burges  of 
Glasgw  to  serve  printeis  and  servad  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeirs  be  his  indento'' 
of  ye  dait  the  saxt  day  of  Fe'  1621  zeirs. 

Vigesimo   tertio   die  mensis   Fe"'   Anno   Domini   1621. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  covenar  deacones  of  ye  burghe  of  Glasgw  and 
y  counsell  being  covenit  in  ye  counselhous  of  ye  said  burghe  for  collecting 
of  ye  sowme  of  four  hundrethe  pund  money  for  ye  pairt  of  ye  craftis  and  y 
assisteris  of  ye  said  bur'  for  help  and  supplie  to  putt  ane  ruiff  vpoun  ye  new 
work  buildit  in  ye  colledg  of  ye  said  burghe  in  respect  ye  mcheant  rak 
condiscendit  to  gif  als  mekill  for  supplie  of  ye  said  work  thairfoir  the  haUl 
deacones  for  yame  and  y  craftis  condiscendit  and  aggreit  to  pay  ye  particular 
sowmes  following  to  mak  vp  ye  said  sowme  to  be  payit  betuix  and  ye  first 
day  of  Apryle  nixtocu  viz  the  deacone  of  ye  hemyrmen  fourtie  inks  money 
the  deacone  of  ye  skyners  fiftie  merks  the  deacone  of  ye  tailzeo''s  fiftie  pund 
the  deacone  of  ye  cordoners  fiftie  pund  the  deacone  of  ye  wobsters  fourtie 


i62i]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  93 

merk  the  visito'  of  ye  maltmen  and  meilmen  fourtie  pund  becaus  yai  war 
vy^wayes  fynnit  and  burdenit  laitlie  the  deacone  of  ye  coupers  fiftie  merk 
the  deacone  of  ye  wrichtis  ten  I1  the  deacone  of  ye  masounes  tuentie  fhk 
deacone  of  ye  flescheo^s  fourtie  merk  the  deacone  of  ye  baxters  ten  pund  the 
deacone  of  ye  bonnetmakers  fywe  pund  and  becaus  thir  sowmes  befoir  stentit  for  deaitin 
will  not  mak  out  ye  iiij<=  ll  thairfoir  it  is  statute  and  ordanet  that  ye  deaco 
covenar  mak  out  ye  samy  to  be  allowet  in  his  compt  of  ye  comoun  guids. 

PenuUimo  Martij  1621. 
The  said  day  Johne  Boik  sone  to  Johne  Boik  quarrio''  is  buiket  heirin  Prenteis  Boik. 
as  he  quha  is  bundin  prenteis  to  William  Allansoun  wobster  burges  of  Glasgow 
to  serve  him  sevin  zeir  prenteis  and  twa  zeir  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  enterie 
qlk  is  to  begin  at  Beltane  nixtocum  be  his  indento"'  daitit  ye  twentie  sevin 
day  of  Merche  1621  zeirs. 

The  said  day  James  Park  sone  to  James  Park  indueller  in  Glasgw    is  Prenteis  Park, 
buiket  heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to  Willia  Birrell  armoi^ar  burges  of  yis 
burghe  to  serve  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeiris  conforme  to  ye  indento''  sett  doun 
betuix  yame  y'anent  of  ye  dait  the  first  day  of  De""  last  bypast  1620. 

Sexto  Junij  1621. 
The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  and  deacones  being  convenit  w'in  Lytes  for 
ye  counselhous  of  Glasgw  to  elect  fywe  psounes  of  ye  craftis  to  ryde  w'  ye  conveinarq" 
Archbischeop  to  Ed''  and  to  attend  him  ve  tvme   of   ye  pliament  and  to  sett  f*"  ^J^'^ "''  >'* 

^  ^        -'  J      r  bi5chop  at  ve 

doun  q'  ilk  ane  of  yame  sould  have  for  y  chairges  it  was  first  aggreit  that  ilk  p/iHiament. 
ane  of  yame  sould  haue  for  y  expess  fourtie  schilling  ilk  day  during  y  remayning 
and  becaus  they  could  not  aggrie  on  ye  persounes  q^  sould  ryde  they  all  in 
ane  voice  referrit  ye  same  to  ye  deacon  covenar  quha  nominat  w'  himself 
Waltir  Dowglas  Ninia  Andersoun  Jo"*  Padie  and  Johne  Scott  deacones  and 
ordanet  ye  off''  to  warn  yame  to  y'  effect  and  ordanes  the  collecto""  to  pay  y 
expenss  to  be  allowet  in  his  compt. 

Apud  Glasgw  nono  die  mensis  Odobris  Anno  Domini  millimo  sexcetesimo 

vigesimo  prima. 

The  qlk  day  Thomas  Morsoun  bailzie  and  present  deacovenar  and  haill  Complaint 
remanent  deacones  of  ye  craftis  of  yis  burghe  of  Glasgw  visito''  and  y  counsell  ye  bryt^he^rlng 
being  all  convenit  in  ye  Blakfreir  Ivirk  for  heiring  of  ane  complaint  gevin  in  ^nd  decreu 
be  Alex''  Mayne  last  chosin  deacone  of  ye  wrichtis  for  the  zeir  to  cii  w'  cocours  yaiVon. 
of  Patrik  Colquhoun  Ro'  Mure  James  and  Jo°  Bards  and  James  Reid  callit 
Cassiltoun  James  his  m''s  of  craft  and  of  ye  maist  p'  of  y  brethering  of  craft 
aganis  James  Allansoun  last  deacon  James  Elphenstoun  George  Scott  Ar^* 
Reid  James  Reid  eldest  Adame  and  Hew  Elphenstounes  Ro*  Pettigrew  Edward 
Loche  Ro«  Reid  brey^ing  of  y  craft  makand  mentioun  that  q^  the  said  James 
Allansoun  being  wnit  to  haue  convenit  first  at  ye  craftis  hospitall  vpoun  ye 


94  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1621 

aucht  day  of  October  and  secundlie  yis  day  at  ten  ho^s  to  haue  convenit  w* 
ye  deacone  and  present  maisters  of  craft  to  produce  y  box  tua  mortclaithes 
actis  of  pliament  ben  and  bulk  and  extract  of  ye  gildrie  and  to  mak  his  compt 
of  his  intromissioun  w'  ye  craftis  guids  as  lykwyis  ye  remanent  psounes 
abovecoplenit  being  lykwyis  twyis  vvarnit  to  heir  his  compt  he  and  yai  all 
refuist  and  dissobeyet  y  deacone  as  lykwyis  the  said  Ro'  falling  be  his  enterie 
last  friema  being  chosin  off  refuist  to  accept  ye  samy  qlk  complaint  being 
red  in  all  y  presens  and  ye  saids  psounes  complenit  vpoun  being  seuerallie  and 
pticularlie  introgatt  quhidder  yai  wald  abyde  ye  judgment  and  determinatioun 
of  ye  said  deacovenar  deacones  and  y  counsell  anent  ye  said  complaint  and 
contravsie  amangis  ya  they  submittit  yameselfs  to  y  jugments  y^intill  as  y 
ordinars  be  ye  lettir  of  gildrie.  Lykeas  yai  allegit  that  ye  said  Ale.x''  Mayne 
was  not  laui'«  chosin  deacone  q^'v'poun  they  being  all  removit  and  dew  trpll 
being  taikin  of  ye  premiss  be  ye  declara'un  of  Gilbert  Merschell  y  clerk  and 
depositioun  of  Rit^  Herbiesoun  ofii''  be  his  aithe  tane  y''on  as  lykwyis  be  ye 
said  James  Allasouns  awin  confessioun  that  ye  said  Alex''  was  buiket  deacone 
and  ye  bulk  in  ye  box  and  the  box  in  his  possioun  qlk  he  could  not  deny  the 
deacone  covenar  deacones  and  y  counsell  all  in  ane  voice  fand  ye  said  Alex"" 
to  be  lau"6  chosin  deacone  for  ye  zeir  to  cu  q"  ye  nixt  electioun  and  y^foir 
yai  decernit  and  ordanet  the  said  James  w'  all  diligens  to  deljrver  to  ye  said 
Alex'  present  deacone  y  box  mortclaithes  buikes  and  ben  abouespeit  and  y 
bulk  yi'in  and  als  to  mak  his  compt  of  his  intromissioun  w'  ye  craftis  guids 
and  to  be  wardit  q'l  ye  samyn  be  done  and  decernis  ye  said  Ro'  Reid  to  accept 
ye  offi'schip  and  to  sers^e  as  y  offi''  and  becaus  ye  said  James  in  judgment 
refuist  to  obey  yis  y  decreit  thairfoir  for  his  dissobediance  first  and  last  and 
contempt  done  to  his  deacone  they  decerne  liim  to  pay  four  pund  and  ilk  ane 
of  ye  remanent  psounes  abouecomplenit  vpoun  to  pay  fourtie  schilling  as 
vnlawes  and  penalteis  for  y  contempt  and  dissobediance  the  ane  half  y'of 
to  ye  comoun  weall  of  y  craft  and  ye  vther  half  to  ye  craftis  hospitall  and 
collecto''  y^of  for  ye  weill  of  ye  pure  requeisting  and  des;yTing  ye  proueist  and 
bailleis  of  yis  burghe  to  intpone  y  auctie  to  yis  y  decreit. 

Decimo  die  mensis  Odobris  1621. 

Lytis  for  The  Said  day  Thomas  Morsoun  bailzie  and  deacone  covenar  for  ye  present 

conveinar.  ^nd  haill  deacones  of  ye  burghe  of  Glasgw  being  covenit  in  ye  Blakfreir  Kirk 
for  electing  of  thrie  psounes  of  ye  craftis  rak  to  be  presentit  to  ye  grit  counsell 
of  ye  said  burghe  to  be  on  lyte  that  out  of  ye  thrie  ane  may  be  chosin  deacon 
covenar  for  ye  zeir  to  cu  they  haue  nominat  and  electit  and  be  yir  pntis 
nominat  and  elect  Johne  Padie  skynner  W™  Neilsoun  zounger  and  Jo°  Andersoun 
cordiner  on  lyte  that  ane  of  ye  thrie  may  be  chosin  deacovenar.  Lykeas 
yai  haue  lyttit  ye  saids  thrie  psounes  becaus  ye  present  deaco  coveneir  is  electit 
bailzie  and  could  not  y'^foir  be  on  lyte  as  auld  deacovenar.  Lykeas  ye  saids 
lyttis  ar  to  be  pntid  be  W"  Andersoun  and  George  Bogle. 


i62i]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  95 

xix  Odohris  1621. 

The  said  day  Jo"  Padie  now  electit  deacon  covenar  for  ye  zeir  to  cu  being  Deikin 
cvenit  w*  ye  deacones  in  ye  craftis  hospital!  for  electing  his  counsell  he  nominat  comisdi?'^^ 
and  appoynttit  to  be  on  his  counsell  ye  deacones  viz  Johnc  Scott  hemyrma 
\\m  Andersoun  cordoner  Jo"  Mitchell  tailzeor  W™  Luiff  skynner  M^  Ro^ 
Hamiltoun  for  ye  chirurgianes  George  Pollok  coup  Jo"  Baird  wobst  W"^  Heriott 
baxter  Ro'  Watsoun  flescheo''  Johne  Rakein  elder  masoun  Alexf  Mayne  wry' 
Mitchell  Spens  bonnetmaker  deacones  of  y  callings  Waltir  Douglas  visito"' 
Johne  Machan  visito''  of  ye  gairners  and  w'  yame  Thomas  Morsoun,  baillie, 
Ro'  Rowatt  Patrik  Maxuall  Ninia  Andersoun  James  Fischer  David  Scherar 
W"  Howie  Thomas  Achissoun  W"  Neilsoun  zounger  Alex''  Cauldwoll  Georg 
Bogle  Jo"  Andersoun  Thomas  Fawsyde  Patrik  Colquhoun  Andro  Mylne 
George  Mure  James  Lichtbody  Ro^  M<^Cure  Gawa  Neisbit  Jo"  Stirling  Ro' 
Hogiszaird  q^  being  put  maid  faithe  as  vse  is. 

xxij  Odobris  1621. 

The  said  day  W™  Scott  sone  to  Jo"  Scott  in  Calder  is  buikit  heirin  as  he  Printeis  Scott. 
q*  is  bund  printeis  to  W"  Dobbie  wobster  burges  of  ye  burghe  to  serve  him 
sewin  zeir  printeis  and  tua  zeir  for  meitt  and  fie   be  thair  indento''  sett  doun 
betwix  ya  yJ'anent  of  ye  dait  of  yis  pnt  act. 

The  said  day  Jo"  Homyll  sone  to  Neill  Homyll  mchead  is  buiket  heirin  Printeis 
as  he  qi^  is  bund  jjrinteis  to  Patrick  Gemyll  elder  skynner  for  ye  space  of  fywe  "°"'"'>'"- 
zeiris  and  tua  zeir  for  meitt  and  fie  fra  his  enterie  qlk  was  at  ye  dait  of    ye 
indento^  sett  doun  betuix  ya  y''anent  qlk  is  of  ye  dait  the  xij  day  of  October 
instant. 

Vigesimo  qrto  Odohris   1621. 

The  qlk  day  James  Braidwod  deacone  covenar  remanent  deacones  of  ye  George 
burghe  of  Glasgw  and  y  counsell  being  covenit  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  for  heiring  ^°sies  compt. 
of  George  Bogle  collecto''  his  compt  of  intromissioun  w'  ye  craftis  hospitalls 
rent  fra  Michaelmes  1619  to  Michaelmes  1620  zeirs  and  fra  Michaelmes  1620 
to  Michaelmes  last  bypast  1621  zeirs.  And  first  begynand  ye  first  zeir  fra 
Michaelmes  1619  to  1620  he  producit  his  compt  and  chairget  himself  w'  ye 
hospitall  new  rentall  extending  to  ane  hundrethe  fiftie  tua  pund  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  w*  ye  auld  rentall  extending  to  xxvj  li  ix  s.  iiij  d.  Item  w*  ye  beddis  of 
ye  bak  almoushous  ten  pund  viij  s.  viij  d.  Item  w*  M''  Ro'  Herbiesouns  anueh 
rent  four  pund  x  s.  iiij  d.  Item  w'  Eupha  Wilsouns  anuell  is  ten  ffik.  Item 
Jo"  Dobbeis  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  w'  Hew  Blairs  sax  pund  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  Item 
Agnes  Steill  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  Ite  Andro  Haddoweis  land  acquyret  fra  vrnqi^^ 
M""  Ro'  AUasoun  xxix  s.  vmq''^  Thomas  Mures  landis  ten  schilling.  Suiha 
twa  hundrethe  saxtein  pund  xiiij  s.  Item  he  charges  himself  w'  ye  anuel 
of  ye  money  lent  out  to  ye  psounes  eftirspeit  vpliftit  be  him  fra  ya  viz  fra 


96  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1621 

ye  Laird  of  Rais  for  v"  pund  fiftie  punds  of  anuell  fra  W"  Howie  for  iiij^  merks 
prin"  xxvj  tl  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  fra  Ro'  Craufurd  for  ye  tme  of  Mtimes  1619  of  v" 
merks  prin"  xvj  I1  xii]  s.  iiij  d.  Ite  fra  Johne  Farquhar  for  ye  \\'itsunday 
tme  yfeftir  for  ye  sa  sowme  being  puttyd  in  his  hads  xvj  t  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
fra  \V"»  Stirling  of  Law  for  vj  scoir  te  inks  prin''  viij  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  ye  haill 
zeir  fra  Eliazer  Hamiltoun  for  four  scoir  punds  ye  said  zeir  viij  ll  fra  W™ 
Layng  for  twa  hundrethe  inks  xiij  ll  vj  s.  8d.  fra  Silvertounhill  for  v<=lx  ll 
ye  said  zeir  fiftie  sax  punds  Item  fra  my  lord  for  ye  first  qrt  of  v^  inks  viij  ll 
vj  s.  8d.  Item  fra  Ernok  conforme  to  ye  deacones  aggriment  w'  him  Ixxxxiij  ll 
vj  s.  8d.  for  his  xij^^  inks  Witsounday  tme  and  byrunes  of  befoir  Item  for  ye 
Witsounday  tme  of  sewin  hundrethe  iriks  thairof  y'  Patrik  Maxuall  had  in 
his  hand  xxiij  1  vj  s.  8d.  Item  for  ye  Witsounday  tme  of  ye  v^  merks  Ernok 
retenit  xvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  Item  fra  Gilbert  Auldcorne  of  his  restis  vj  ll  xiij  s. 
iiij  d.  Item  fra  Patrik  Maxuall  restad  of  ye  last  zeirs  compt  ten  pund  v  s.  8d. 
fra  Jo°  Steuart  for  daills  tuentie  pund.  Suiha  of  ye  anuells  and  vy^  pticulars 
by  ye  retails  four  hundrethe  ane  pund  vj  s.  8d.  Item  he  chairges  himself 
w*  ye  sowmes  gottin  in  for  ye  mortclaithe  Item  vpliftit  fra  James  Lichtbodie 
for  his  wyfis  buriall  for  M''  Jo"  Flechers  moy^s  buriall  for  vmq'^  Andro  Boyids 
vmq'^  Elisoun  Andersoune  vmq'^  Jean  Conynghame  vmqi«  Alex"'  Gemyll 
and  vmq'^  Marioun  Scots  for  ilk  ane  of  ye  said  defunct  psounes  burialls  fourtie 
schilling  fra  W™  Fawsyde  for  his  guid  moyi's  tua  inks  and  fra  George  Scot  for 
Capringtounes  buriall  aucht  inks  extending  to  xx  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  Item  he 
chairges  himself  w*  ye  legacies  left  to  ye  hospitall  first  be  Jo°  Steuarts  wyf 
ten  ink  be  vmq'^  W™  Colquhoun  xx  ll  Ada  Neills  legacie  te  inks  Dauid 
Adaes  legacie  ten  inks.  Suina  of  ye  legacies  fourtie  pund.  Item  he  chairges 
himself  w*  ye  sax  schilling  and  fywe  inks  vplitfit  fra  ye  burgess  ressauit  ye 
said  zeir  extending  to  fourtie  thrie  pund  vj  s.  Nota  ye  pticular  naes  was  not 
gevin  be  ye  ressauer  to  ye  comptar  bot  onlie  ye  suina  y^of.  Item  he  chairges 
himself  w'  ye  vnlawes  ye  said  zeir  addebtit  be  James  Scheills  xl  s.  be  Jo" 
Smythe  coup  tua  ink  Jo"  Smythe  bonetmaker  ten  ink.  Suina  ten  pund.  Qlks 
pticulars  being  ye  comptars  haill  chairges  and  oneratioun  extends  de  claro 
to  sewin  hundrethe  threttie  twa  pund. 

FoUowes  the  comptars  dischairge  and  exoneratioun. 

Item  he  exoners  himself  w'  ye  sowmes  following  debursit  be  him  to  ye 
psounes  and  in  maner  eftirspeit  viz  to  Henrie  Ros  and  Johne  Scheirar  in  ye 
hospitall  to  ya  tua  for  ane  zeirs  rent  Iiij  ti  vj  s.  8d.  to  At^  ArmC  y  for  ane 
qrt  and  ane  half  ten  pund  Item  to  Johne  Leggatt  for  thrie  quarters  tuentie 
pund  to  Johne  Kirlie  for  thrie  quarters  twentie  pund  to  Edward  Pollok  for 
half  ane  zeir  tuetie  inks  to  W"  Bogle  for  ane  qrt  ten  ink  Item  for  coills  and 
elding  to  yam  xvij  ll  xiiij  s.  x  d.  Item  to  Jo"  Glen  be  warrad  xxiiij  s.  to  Jo° 
Rasayes  wyf  for  Ar<i  ArmCs  debt  four  pund  iiij  s.  for  his  woning  scheit  xxvij  s. 


K  -Sr^^.J**- 


4|1j  i  ^1. 


•*4  r-r^ 


f^ 


\i. ' 


.J 


■  \'i 


.^m 


1^ 


i 


So 


5 


r- 


■U"^ 


I  ;  h 


^ 


u 


r* 


1  'ij-iK--^"^ 


\  H/  Til  *  t'  -  ' 


'^ 


.1^ 


-f^t^ 


t5 


.^? 


■5 


i62i]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  97 

for  his  kist  xxxiij  s.  iiij  d.  to  ye  wyf  for  woing  of  him  ten  schilhng  for  ane  new 
cruik  to  ye  hospitall  mending  of  ye  dure  bands  and  naills  xxxiiij  s.  for  leid 
to  ye  battis  fywe  schilhng  for  ane  lock  to  ye  back  dure  viij  s.  for  expenss  to 
ye  workma  q''  laid  ye  pavemet  for  sichting  y^of  vj  s.  for  sand  yi'to  xvj  s.  for 
leiding  of  stanes  y^to  xiiij  s.  in  expenss  divers  tymes  w'  ye  workme  xxj  s. 
iiij  d.  gevin  to  ya  for  y  work  and  stanes  xij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  for  ane  foill  to  ye 
bak  dure  iiij  s.  for  lyme  sewin  schilling  for  expenss  quhen  yai  wer  payet  iij  s. 
iiij  d.  for  v  laid  of  lyme  to  poynt  ye  hous  xxiij  s.  iiij  d.  for  sand  yi'to  xvj  s. 
for  mexing  y^of  iiij  s.  for  poyntting  ye  hous  and  naills  four  pund  xvj  s.  viij  d. 
for  daills  to  ye  bed  dures  v  tl  xiij  s.  iiijd.  for  xvj  pare  bands  yi'to  fiftie  sewin 
schilling  iiij  d.  for  naills  y^to  xx  s.  for  ye  workmaschip  and  drink  yi'at  iij  ll 
x  s.  for  leiding  ye  daills  xl  d.  for  sawing  twa  daills  iiij  s.  iiij  d.  Item  for 
Symoune  Bairds  cloik  ix  ll  xij  s.  for  tua  pair  of  schone  to  him  xhiij  s.  in 
expess  for  mending  ye  bell  xvj  s.  for  v  ells  of  blew  claithe  to  be  W™  Bogles 
gown  ix  ll  for  making  y^oi  xij  s.  to  M^  George  Sempill  for  ye  anuell  of  his 
V  ffik  xxxiij  1  vj  s.  viij  d.  expess  q"  he  was  payet  xviij  s.  for  ye  anuell  of  his 
last  v"^  ink  xvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  in  expenss  w'  him  ten  s.  to  Jo"  Colquhoun  his 
zeirs  anuell  thri  scoir  ane  pund  iiij  s.  to  James  Braidwod  for  Esther  Coliibeis 
zeirs  anuell  Iiij  ll  vj  s.  8d.  to  Gilbert  Auldcorne  zounger  be  ane  warrad  xl  ll 
to  Patrik  Maxuall  for  vpmaking  of  ye  prin'i  sowmes  awin  in  to  ye  hospitall 
deburset  be  him  thrie  scoir  xvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  to  Jo°  Craig  for  ye  brusso'' 
Ixvj  i  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  Item  in  expess  w'  him  vj  s.  for  saidill  viij  ll  for  chairges 
and    Ires  [  ]  xvj  s.  for  chairging    Prestoun  xl  s.  in  expenss  iiij  s. 

and  w'  Jo"  Quhyt  viij  s.  to  vse  deligece  for  denuncing  Prestoun  xliij  s.  to 
Jo"  Quhyt  to  caus  do  ye  service  fo'  mk  in  expenss  ye  deacovenar  in  comoun 

effairs  ten  s.      Item  he of  graines  of  Ernoks  gold  vij  s.  for 

regrating  James  Howeis  band  x  s.  viij  d.  for  charging  him  xvj  s.  Item  of 
expess  in  James  Fischers  at  ane  melting  in  comoun  effairs  xvj  s.  ane  vy''  tym 
XV  s.  and  w'  M""  George  Sempill  at  thrie  tymes  Iiij  s.  conforme  to  ye  compt 

Item  his   last  v<=  mk of  graines  v  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  in  expess  w' 

him  at  ye  ty  ten  s.  Item  vnpayet  be  Patrik  Maxuall  restad  of  his  compt 
ten  pund  vj  s.  8d.  Ite  Jo"  Colquhounes  legacie  not  payet  is  xx  ll  Jo"  Steuarts 
wyffis  legacie  not  payet  is  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  forgevin  to  Gilbert  Auldcorne 
elder  tua  fhks  comptit  for  Item  not  gottin  in  of  burgess  silver  fra  Alia 
Winzetts  guid  sone  and  Jo"  Dobbeis  tua  sounes  xviij  s.  Item  to  ye  clerk 
X  mk  Ite  non  pay*  is  in  ye  auld  retail  for  not  in  vse  iiij  ll  vj  s.  8d.  Item 
Matho  Kers  fie  iiij  ll.  Suiiia  of  ye  comptars  haill  discharge  and  exoneratioun 
is  sa.\  hundrethe  thrie  scoir  xiij  ll  ij  s.  vj  d. 

Sua  chairge  and  dischairge  being  conferit  the  comptar  is  auchtand 
m  fiftie  aucht  pund  xvij  s.  vj  d.  q'"of  allowet  to  ye  comptar  auchtein 
pund  xvij  s.  and  vj  d.  and  als  they  gift  to  him  the  said  ten  pund 
X  s.  restand  awin  be  Patrik  Maxuall  for  his  chauges  q^by  is  instlie 


98  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1621 

restand  awin  in  of  his  haill  chairge  to  thame  fourtie  punds  to  compt 
for  jis  zeirs  compt  following. 

Followes  the  said  Georg  Bogle  collector  his  compt  of  the  hospitall 
rent  for  Michaelmas  1620  to  Michaelmas  last  bypast  1621. 

Item  in  ye  first  the  comptar  chairges  himself  w*  ye  sowme  of  fourtie 
punds  restand  be  him  of  ye  last  zeirs  compt  Item  w'  ye  deutie  of  ye  new 
retail  extending  to  ane  hundrethe  iiftie  tua  pund  Item  w'  ye  auld  rentall 
beds  of  ye  bak  almoushous  anuell  rents  addebtit  be  M^  Ro*  Herbiesoun  Euphame 
Wilsoun  Johne  Dobbie  Hew  Blair  Agnes  Steill  Andro  Haddowie  and  Thomas 
Mures  land  extending  in  haill  to  thrie  scoir  four  pund  and  als  w'  ye  anuell 
of  ye  haill  mo^  lent  out  ptening  to  ye  hospitall  extending  to  fywe  thowsand 
and  fourtie  ink  the  anuell  q^oi  fra  Mtimes  last  to  Mtimes  nixt  q^'w'  he  chairges 
himself  extendis  to  thrie  hundrethe  threttie  sax  pund  Item  he  chairges  himself 
w'  ye  money  following  gottin  in  for  ye  mortclaithe  fra  ye  psounes  eftirspeit 
viz  fra  Gawane  Neisbit  for  ane  landwart  buriall  four  pund  for  vmq'^  Ro' 
Wilsounes  buriall  xl  s.  fra  vmqi«  James  Andersounes  buriall  thrie  pund  Item 
fra  James  Dunca  fywe  ink  Item  fra  James  Hamiltoun  fywe  ink  fra  Ro» 
Patirsoun  for  his  bairne  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  fra  Jo"  Padie  for  his  fathers  buriall  xl  s. 
Item  fra  him  for  his  bairne  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  fra  Jo"  Luiff  xl  s.  Item  for  vmq"' 
James  \\'ilsoun  xl  s.  fra  James  Fischer  xl  s.  fra  Ro'  Bell  for  his  bairne  xiij  s. 
iiij  d.  for  vmq'^  M''  Ro'  Glemis  buriall  xl  s.  fra  Jo°  Wallace  xl  s.  fra  Georg 
Andersoun  xl  s.  for  vmq'^  Thomas  Gray  and  his  sone  iij  li.  Suiha  for  ye 
mortclaithe  xxxiiij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  Item  he  chairges  himself  w'  vmq'^  W" 
Colquhounes  legacie  xvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  Item  vmq'^  James  Braidwods 
legacie  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  Item  Jo°  Steuarts  wyffis  legacie  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Suma  of  legacies  iiftie  pund.  Item  he  chairges  himself  w'  ye  enterie  of  ye 
burgess  extending  to  xiij  ll  i  s. 

Surha  of  ye  comptars  haill  chairge  extendis  to  sevin  hundrethe 
nyntein  pund  sewin  schilling  viij  d. 

Followes  the  comptars  dischairge  and  exonera' un. 

Item  he  exoners  himself  of  ye  sowmes  following  debursit  be  him  in  maner 
eftirspeit  viz  in  ye  first  to  ye  pure  of  ye  hospitall  iirst  to  vmqi«  Johne  Scherar 
for  thrie  quarts  xx  ll  to  Jo^  Kirlie  for  ye  haill  zeir  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  to  Jo" 
Leggatt  to  Henrie  Ros  W"  Bogle  and  Edward  PoUok  to  ilk  ane  of  yame  for 
ye  zeir  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiijd  .  Item  for  coillis  and  peittis  to  ye  pure  in  ye  hospitall 
and  as  occasioun  offerit  of  meitting  y^in  xix  ll  iij  s.  Item  for  mending  ye 
bell  xviij  s.  Item  of  expess  w'  M'  George  Sample  at  ye  paying  his  anuell 
xxvj  s.  to  W"  Wotherspoun  be  wrad  xij  s.  for  claithe  to  be  ye  pure  menis 
gownes  xxvij  t  Item  for  hardin  and  drink  vj  s.  Item  for  making  of  ye 
same  xlviij  s.     Item  of  expenss  at  ye  ressaving  of  Ladielands  anuell  vj  s.  for 


i62i]         RFXORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  gq 

ye  pure  menis  belts  xxvj  s.  Item  to  Symone  Baird  (or  his  schone  xlviij  s. 
Item  of  expenss  in  tutting  of  decreits  x  s.  Item  gevin  to  Symone  Baird  q" 
he  was  seik  xij  s.  Item  of  expenss  w»  ye  deaco  covenar  and  vy's  x  s.  Item 
of  expenss  w'  M'  Georg  Sempill  xvj  s.  Item  w'  Johne  Thomsoun  q°  he 
ressauit  ye  Ires  xxx  s.  Item  to  \V"'  Zair  for  partchment  and  drink  silver 
lij  s.  Item  for  raising  ye  sinck  xij  s.  Item  for  leiding  in  ye  stanes  iiij  s. 
Item  to  Jo"  Watsoun  be  directioun  xl  s.  Item  to  W"  Wotherspune  be  direc- 
tioun  XX  s.  Item  for  ye  sadill  viij  ll  Item  for  hinging  ye  buirds  vnder  ye 
beds  xvj  s.  Item  for  silk  to  mend  ye  freinzie  of  ye  mortclaithe  xlviij  s.  Item 
to  Symone  Baird  at  comand  iij  ll  Item  of  inlaik  of  Johne  Farquhars  anuell 
xiij  s.  Item  of  expenss  w'  ye  glasinwTicht  iiij  s.  Item  for  ye  glas  windois 
mending  and  ane  airne  band  y''to  iiij  ll  xv  s.  Item  for  lyme  and  sand  to  poynt 
w'  xxvij  s.  for  leiding  y'of  vj  s.  Item  for  poynting  xx  s.  Item  to  M^  Georg 
Sample  for  his  zeirs  anuell  Ixvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  Item  to  Jo°  Colquhoun  for 
his  zeiris  anuell  xlviij  s.  Item  to  Johne  Craig  for  ye  brusso'  Ixvj  ll  xiij  s. 
iiij  d.  Item  to  James  Braidwod  for  Est  Colubie  hir  deutie  Iiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  the  comptar  dischairges  himself  of  ye  anuell  of  ye  j<=  mk  gevin  to  ye 
colledg  ruif  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  Item  Matho  Kers  feall  iiij  ll  Item  not  gottin 
in  of  ye  auld  rentall  xviij  ll  of  ye  last  zeirs  compt  and  lykuyis  yis  pnt  zeir 
xviij  ll  Item  leiding  ye  calsey  stanes  and  drink  v  ll  ix  s.  Ite  ye  clerks  feall 
X  ll  Item  ye  craftis  to  be  exonerit  of  Myntois  anuell  ye  zeir  of  God  1620 
xlvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiijd.  and  als  of  ye  Witsounday  tme  vnpayet  q'"wt  he  was  charget 
ye  last  zeir  and  vndischaiiget  ye  zeir  of  God  1620  xxiij  ft  vj  s.  viij  d.  Item 
he  craifis  to  be  dischairget  of  Johne  Steuarts  wyffis  legacie  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Suina  of  ye  comptars  haill  dischairge  allowet  to  him  extends 
de  daro  to  sax  hundrethe  tuentie  nyne  punds  xiij  s.  8d.  Sua  the 
comptars  chairge  and  dischairge  being  conferit  he  is  restand  in 
to  ye  deacone  covenar  deacones  and  y  counsell  four  scoir  nyne  pund 
xiij  s.  money  by  and  atto'  Myntois  anuell  fra  Witsounday  1620  to 
Mtimes  nixtocii  extending  to  xxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d.  and  of  xviij  ll  zeirli 
of  ye  auld  rentall  of  Matho  Kers  collectioun  1620  and  1621  extending 
in  haOl  to  thrie  scoir  aucht  pund  w'  Jo"  Steuarts  wyffes  legacie  ten 
ink  comptit  y^in. 

And  yi'foir  ye  deacone  covenar  deacones  and  y  counsell  ordanet  the  said  Bogles 
George  Bogle  collecto''  to  pay  the  fywe  psounes  q^  raid  to  Ed''  and  attendit 
ye  bischop  ane  hundrethe  pund  amag  tha  and  ye  haill  rest  of  ye  sowmes  of 
anuells  and  vy's  abouespeit  restand  on  ye  comptar  vngottin  of  ye  auld  rentall 
and  Jo°  Steuarts  legacie  they  haue  assignet  ye  samy  to  ye  said  George  for 
his  service  to  be  intromettit  w'  vpliftit  vsit  and  dispoinet  vpoun  at  his  pleaso"'. 
Lykeas  yai  all  in  ane  voice  exoner  and  simpli  discharge  ye  said  George  of  his 
intromissioun  w'  y  said  haill  rent  abouespeit  dew  to  be  payet  for  ye  weill  of 
y  hospitall  the  said  tua  zeirs  jajvjc  tuentie  and  tuentie  ane  zeiris  conforme 


discharge. 


lOO 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1621 


Act  anent 
certart 

particulars  of 
ye  hospitalls 
effairs. 


Ane  collecto' 
and  his  voge. 


Offi'  voge. 


to  baithe  ye  pticular  compts  abouewrittin  be  yir  pntis  writtin  and  insart 
heirin  at  y  comands  and  directioun  vpoun  ye  xxiiij  day  of  October  jajvjc 
tuentie  ane  zeirs  sub'  be  y  clerk. 

J.  Hutchesoun. 

The  said  day  it  is  notit  heirin  that  Ernoks  fywe  hundrethe  merks  is 
vpliftit  q^oi  lent  out  to  Jo"  Pordoun  on  his  tene'  four  hundrethe  ink  and  ye 
vther  hundrethe  ink  was  gevin  to  ye  colledg  to  help  to  put  on  ye  ruif  on  ye 
new  work,  fywe  peice  of  evidentis  being  y  richtis  fra  Jo°  Pordoun  band  in  ye 
box  and  als  M""  Georg  Sempill  Jo°  Colquhoun  and  Jo°  Craigis  acquittances 
putt  y^in  of  y  deuteis  bypast,  the  Laird  of  Rais  band  and  Ires  gevin  out  to  ye 
deacone  covenar.  Thomas  Morsoun  last  deacovenar  gave  in  Ladielandis 
band  and  put  in  ye  box,  the  keyis  y''of  gevin  to  James  Mitchell  Jo°  Scott  and 
\V™  Andersoun  deacones  to  be  gevin  bak  at  ye  nixt  electioun. 

The  said  day  Johne  Padie  new  chosin  deaco  covenar  deacones  and  y 
counsell  be  plurahtie  of  voittis  haue  condiscendit  and  aggreit  that  ye  deaco 
covenar  sail  haue  zeirlie  ane  collecto''  chosin  to  collect  ye  ordinar  rents  belonging 
to  y  hospitall  and  ordanes  him  to  haue  zeirlie  xx  ll  of  feall  yHoii  to  be  allowet 
to  him  m  his  comptis. 

The  said  day  the  deacones  hes  condiscendit  to  gif  ilk  ane  of  ya  to  Symone 
Baird  for  his  feall  in  ty  cuing  zeirlie  during  his  service  tuentie  schilling  to  be 
payet  conforme  to  vse  and  wont. 


Watsone  in  ye  The  said  day  they  haue  ordanet  Johne  VVatsoun  to  be  putt  in  ye  hospitall 

in  vmqi^  Jo"  Scherars  place  and  to  haue  ane  gowne  and  ordinar  meteinment 
as  vyi's  y^in. 

xxvij  Octo's  162 1. 

Prenteis  The  Said  day  Andro  Mairtoun  sone  to  vmq'e  James  Mairtoun  is  buiket 

Mairtoun.         heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to  James  Clerk  cutler  and  burges  of  Glasgw 

for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeirs  and  tua  zeir  for  meitt  and  fie  be  y  indento"'  of  ye 

dait  ye  xxvj  day  of  October  instant. 

Hammmouii  '^^^  ^^^^  ^^^  James  Hamiltoun  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis 

to  Ro'  Dobbie  cordoner  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  fywe  zeir  printeis  and  tua 
zeir  for  meitt  and  fie  by  y  indento'  of  ye  dait  ye  xx  day  of  August  1621. 


Prenteis 
Nicolsoun. 


Pemdtimo  Odobris  1621. 

The  said  day  Jo"  Nicolsoun  was  buiket  heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis 
to  Jo"  Kirlie  zounger  wobst  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  him  sewin  zeir  printeis 
and  twa  zeir  for  meitt  and  fie  be  y  indento'  of  ye  dait  ye  xxix  day  of  October 
1621. 


i622]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  loi 

Sexto  De's  162 1. 

The  said  day  James  Pollok  sone  to  vmq'«  M'  David    Pollok  is  buiket  Prenteis 
heirin  as  piinteis  to  Johne  Padie  skyner  to  serve  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeir     °  °'^ 
fra  ye  dait  of  his  indento'  qlk  is  of  ye  dait  the  tent  day  of  No'  1621. 

Septimo  No's  1621. 

The   deacovenar  deacones  and  y  counsell  being  convenit   in  ye   craftis  Gift  of 
hospitall  ordanet  Johne  Govane  sone  to  Jo°  Govane  ofii''  to  haue  ane  pnta~un  oowaiie. 
to  ye  gift  of  y  brusso^ie  in  ye  colledge  to  be  sustenit    y^'in  four  zeirs  fra  his 
enterie  qlk  salbe  at  Labmes  nixt  he  being  fund  quahfiet. 

xxviij    of    De's    1621. 

The  said  day   10°  Murchlane  sone  to  Andro  Murchlane  is  buiket  heirin  Prenteis 
as  printeis  to  Michaell  Blair  tailzeo"'  and  is  bund  to  serve  him  sewin  zeir  furthe  *  '^'^  ^  ^°^' 
and  fra  yis  dait  conforme  to  ye  indento''  sett  doun  betuix  ya  yi'anent  of  ye 
dait  of  yis  act. 

xiiij  J  a"'   1622. 

The  said    day  Alex''  Woddrope  sone  to  Jo°  Woddrope  in  Carntyne  is  Prenteis 
buiket  heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to  Jo°  Woddrope  cordoner  burges  of      °     °^^' 
Glasgw  to  serve  him  fywe  zeirs  printeis  and  tua  zeir  for  meitt  and  fie  conforme 
to  y  indento^  of  ye  dait  of  yis  pnt  and  his  enterie  y'"at. 

xxj  Ja'^>    1622. 

The  said  day  Jo°  Jemiesoun  sone  to  Thomas  Jemiesoun  in  Glasgw  is  Prenteis 
bund  printeis  to  Jo°  Baird  deacone  of  ye  wobsters  to  serve  sewin  zeir  printeis  J^ni^soun. 
fra  his  enterie  qlk  is  to  be  at  Cadilmes  be  his  indento''  of  ye  dait  of  yis  act. 

The  said  day  James  Liddell  sone  to  vmq'^  Ro'  Liddell  is  bund  printeis  Prenteis 
to  James  Winzett  (  )  burges  of  yis  bur'  to  serve  sewin  zeir  printeis  Liddell. 

and  tua  zeir  for  meitt  and  fie  fra  his  enterie  qlk  was  of  ye  dait  of  his  indento'' 
of  ye  dait  ye  .xxix  of  October  1621. 

xiij  Fe^>  1622. 

The  said  day  Waltir  Wricht  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q^  is  bund  printeis  to  prenteis 
Thomas  M<=Nair  skyner  to  serve  nyne  zeiris  fra  ye  dait  of  his  indento^  qlk  Wncht. 
is  his  enterie  and  is  of  ye  dait  ye  xv  of  No''  1619. 

Decimo  Maij  1622. 

The  said  day  Ar<i  Weir  broyr  to  Jo"  Weir  skyner  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  Prenteis  Weir. 
c^  is  bund  printeis  to  Ar^  Thomsoun  wobster  burgess  of  Glasgw  to  serve  sewin 
zeir  printeis  and  tua  zeir  for  meitt  and  fie  be  his  indento'  of  ye  dait  ye  vij  of 
May  1622  his  enterie  to  be  y^at. 


102 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1622 


Prenteis 
Booik. 


Prenteis 
M'Kintyre. 


Prenteis 
Mvvre. 


Prenteis 
MwTe 


Prenteis 
Boyd. 


Prenteis 
Miller. 


xj  Maij  1622. 

The  said  day  Johne  Book  sone  to  Johne  Book  indueller  in  Glasgw  is  buiket 
heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to  James  Graha  wobst  burges  of  Glasgw  to 
serve  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeirs  fra  his  entrie  qlk  is  at  ye  dait  of  ye  indento'' 
maid  betuix  ya  q'k  is  at  ye  dait  heirof. 

The  said  day  James  Makintyre  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis 
to  Jo"  Hamiltoun  cordoner  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  sewin  zeirs  furthe  and 
fra  his  enterie  qlk  is  at  ye  dait  of  ye  indento^  sett  doun  betuix  yame  y'anent 
at  ye  xviij  day  of  Apryle  1622. 

The  said  day  W™  Mure  sone  to  Jo°  Mure  in  Gardaroche  is  buiket  heirin 
as  he  q"  is  bund  printeis  to  Michaell  Wilsoun  weifar  to  serve  fpve  zeir  printeis 
and  tua  zeir  for  meitt  and  fie  fra  his  enterie  at  ye  dait  of  y  indento''  daitit  ye 
secund  day  of  Ja''  1622. 

Nono  Julij  1622. 

The  said  day  W™  Mure  sone  to  Jo"  Mure  in  Gardaroche  is  buiket  heirin 
as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to  Johne  Clerk  wobst  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  sewin 
zeir  printeis  and  tua  zeir  for  meitt  and  fie  conforme  to  his  indento"'  of  ye  dait 
ye  aucht  day  of  Julij  1622  insta''.     [See  preceding  entry.] 

xvij  Julij    1622. 

The  said  day  Patrik  Boyd  menstrell  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q»  is  bund 
printeis  to  George  Scherelaw  wobst  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  him  sewin  zeir 
furthe  and  fra  yis  dait  conforme  to  y  indento''  of  ye  dait  heirof. 

The  said  day  Jo°  Myller  sone  to  W'altir  ]\Iyller  in  Glasgw  is  buiket  heirin 
as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to  \W^  Bigger  skyner  burges  of  Glasgw  to  serve  for 
ye  space  of  nyne  zeirs  be  his  indento''  of  ye  dait  the  (  )  da\'  of 

October  1621. 


Prenteis 
Boyd. 


Prenteis 
Boyd. 


Lytis  for  ye 

deikin 

conveinar. 


The  said  day  David  Boyid  is  buiket  heirin  as  he  q*  is  bund  printeis  to 
James  Watsoun  elder  flescheo''  to  serve  sewin  zeiris  be  y  indento''  of  j-e  dait 
ye  xij  day  of  Junij  1622. 

The  said  day  Thomas  Boyid  is  buiket  heirin  as  printeis  to  Ro*  Watsoun 
flescheo''  sone  to  ye  said  James  to  serve  sevin  zeirs  be  his  indento''  of  ye  dait 
ye  xij  day  of  Junij  1622. 

In  ye  Blakfreir  Kirk  of  Glasgw  the  nynt  day  of  October  1622. 

The  qlk  day  Jo"*  Padie  deacone  covenar  deacones  and  y  counsell  being 
covenit  for  nominating  and  electing  tua  psounes  of  ye  craftis  rak  to  be  on 
lyte  w'  ye  present  deacovenar  to  be  pntid  to  ye  counsell  of  ye  said  burghe 
that  ye  deac5venar  for  ye  zeir  to  cu  may  be  chosin  ane  of  ye  thrie  they  haue 


i622]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  103 

electit  and  nominal  VValtir  Douglas  maltma  and  Ninia  Andersoun  to  be  on 
lyte  w'  ye  present  deaco  covenar  to  be  pntid  at  ten  ho''s  to  ye  toun  counsell 
be  W™  Andersoun  and  James  Mitchell  to  ye  effect  forsaid. 

Decimo  Odohris  1622. 

The  said  day  Waltir  Douglas  newlie  electit  deacovenar  in  counsell  con-  Four  pirfsones 
venit  w*  ye  deacoes  and  his  auld  counsell  for  electing  of  four  psounes  of  ye  ""^w  hfs"" 
craftis  rank  to  be  putt  on  ye  deane  of  gilds  counsell  q"  ye  nixt  electioun  they  counsell. 
haue  electit  and  nominat  Patrik  Ma.xuall  lait  bailzie  Ninia  Andersoun  Jo° 
Padie  and  James  Fischer  maltma  to  be  on  ye  deane  of  gilds  counsell  for  ane 
zeir  to  cu  to  be  pntid  be  ye  deaco  covenar  to  ye  dean  of  gild. 

Decimo   sexto   Odohris   1622. 

The  said  day  Walter  Dowglas  deacon  conveinar  haveing  conveinit  ye  Deikin 
deacones  within  ye  craftis  hospitall  for  electing  of  his  counsell  he  nominat  counsell. 
and  electit  and  nominatis  and  electis  ye  haill  deacones  viz  Johne  Duncan 
hemerma  Ninian  Andersoun  cordoner  Gawan  Neisbitt  tailzeo''  W"  Luiff 
skinner  Andro  Mylne  chyrurgian  George  Pollok  cowp  Johne  Clark  vvobstar 
James  Robesoun  baxter  James  Rakein  maissoun  Patrick  Colquhoun  wricht 
Jo°  Smythe  bonetmaker  Robert  Watsoun  flescheo''  deacones  of  yair  callingis 
Williame  Neilsoune  visito"'  Quintein  Reid  gairdiner  and  with  yame  Thomas 
Morsoun,  bailzie,  Ro'  Rowatt  Patrick  Maxwell  James  Fischer  Johne  Padie 
David  Scheirar  W™  Howie  Alex''  Caldwell  M''  Ro'  Hamiltoun  Thomas  Fawsyd 
W""  Andersoun  George  Mure  James  Sympsoun  mariners  Johne  Stling  James 
Lichtbodie  Jo°  Andersoun  Ro'  Hogiszaird  James  Mure  Alex"'  Colquhoun 
Thomas  Gray  George  Bogle  James  Mitchell  quha  being  put  acceptit  ye  said 
office  and  maid  faithe  de  fideli  administratione  yairintill. 

Decimo  quinto  Ja">   1623  [sic]. 
The  said  day  Johne  Hendersoun  is  buiket  prenteis  (  )  Prenteis 

Hendersone. 

The  said  day  Robert  Crawfurde  sone  to  vmq'<'  Ro'  Crawfurde  of  Poussill  I'renteii 
is  buiket  heirin  as  he  quha  is  bund  prenteis  to  Walter  Galbraithe  tailzeo""  burges  *^''^''''"'^^''- 
of  Glasgow  to  serve  fywe  zeir  pienteis  and  tua  zeir  for  meitt  and  fie  be  yaii- 
indento''  of  ye  dait  ye  viij  day  of  Julij  1622. 

Odavo   No''''   1622. 

The  quhilk  day  Walter  Dowglas  deacon  conveinar  with    ye  deacones  of  George 
ve  burghe  of  Glasgow  and  yair  counsell  being  conveinit  in  ye  craftis  hospitall     "^^  "^  "^""'^  ' 
for  heiring  of  ye  compt  of  y'  coinoun  guidis  to  be  maid  be  George  Bogle  y'' 
collecto''  fra  Mertimes  1621  to  Mertimes  1622  chairge  and  dischairge  conteinit 
yairintill  the  said  George  Bogle  producit  his  charge  q''by  he  chairgit  himself 
with  ye  craftis  auld  and  new  rentalls  beddis  of  ye  bak  almoushous  and  with  ye 


104 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1622 


Box  m's. 


anuells  and  few  dewties  astrictit  to  be  payet  be  M''  Ro*  Herbertsoun  Euphame 
Wilsoun  Johne  Dobbie  Hew  Blair  Agnes  Steill  James  Leichema  and  of  vmq'® 
Thomas  Mures  tenemet  in  Briggait  extending  to  ii<=xvi  1l  xvij  s.  and  withe 
ye  anuells  of  four  thowsand  nyn  hundrethe  and  fourtie  inks  prin^i  sowmes 
addebtit  to  yame  extending  to  iiji^xxvi  ll  and  gottin  in  fra  ye  mortclaithe 
xl  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  offerrit  money  xxx  s.  with  ye  enterie  of  ye  burgess  extending 
to  xxvij  ll  ij  s.  viij  d.  quhilk  is  his  haill  chairge  extending  to  v<=lxxxvi  li  xiiij  s. 
and  als  producit  his  discharge  q^'by  he  exonerit  himself  of  his  intromission 
viz  debursit  be  him  for  sustentatioun  of  ye  puir  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  of  M'' 
George  Semplis  anuell  to  Johne  Craig  for  menteining  of  ane  burser  and  vy^ 
pticulars  necesserlie  debursit  be  him  mentionat  in  his  compt  and  of  diverse 
particulars  not  gottin  in  be  him  conteinit  in  his  charge  viz  for  ye  anuell  of 
Myntois  vijc  mks  xxiij  ll  xiiij  s.  iiij  d.  the  said  zeir  of  Johne  Gordounes  iiij*^ 
merks  xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  of  ye  auld  rentall  yat  was  not  gottin  in  be  Mathow 
Ker  ye  last  twa  zeiris  extending  to  xxxv-j  ll  and  of  ye  auld  retail  yis  zeir  Hew 
Blair  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  James  Leischma  xxix  s.  Ro'  Kincaid  iiij  ll  David 
Brownes  twa  barnes  viij  s.  and  of  non  paymentis  iiij  ll  and  Euphame  Wilsounes 
ten  merks  xxxiij  s.  iiij  d.  all  to  be  rememberit  and  insert  in  ye  collectors  nixt 
compt  quhilk  being  allowit  to  him  with  his  awn  fyall  the  dark  and  offi''s  fialls 
his  haill  discharge  extendis  de  claro  to  vj'^lxxiij  li  and  swa  his  charge  and 
discharge  being  conferat  togidder  he  is  fund  superexpendit  Ixxxvj  ll  vj  s. 
and  yairfoir  ye  deacon  conveinar  deacones  and  y^  counsell  exoners  and  simpli 
discharges  ye  said  George  Bogle  yf  collector  of  his  intromissioun  with  ye 
craftis  rent  ye  said  zeir  be  yir  pntis  for  evLr  and  ordaines  him  to  be  satisfeit 
of  ye  superplus  of  ye  sd  compt  of  ye  first  paymet  of  ye  nixt  zeirs  intromissioun. 

Item  ye  said  day  ye  haill  bands  putt  in  ye  box  ye  keyis  gevin  to  Ninia 
Andersoun  W^  Neilsoun  zounger  and  Gawan  Neisbitt  to  be  producit  at  ye 
nixt  electioun. 


Bogle  Item  ye  said  day  they  electit  and  nominat  ye  said  George  Bogill  to  be 

coUecto'.  y^jj.  collecto''  for  ingaddering  of  ye  craftis  rent  this  zeir  to  cum  quha  acceptit 

ye  said  office  in  and  vpoun  him  and    maid    faith    de    fideli  administratione 

yairintill. 

Vigesimo  octavo  No"'  1622. 

Preateis  Reid.  The  said  day  Artho''  Reid  sone  to  At^  Reid  in  Cassiltoun  is  buiket  prenteis 

to  Andro  Finlay  skyner  to  serve  vij  zeir  prenteis  and  twa  zeir  for  meitt  and 
fie  be  y''  indento''  daitit  ye  xxij  day  of  NC  1622. 

Vigesimo  none  No"'  1622. 

Prenteis  Weir.  The  said    day    James  Weir  sone  lau"  to  vmq'^  GObert  Weir  is  buikit 

prenteis  to  Patrik  Weir  hemerma  to  serve  vij  zeir  prenteis  and  thrie  zeirs  for 
meitt  and  fie  be  y'  indento''  dait  ye  viij  day  of  Mche  1618  zeirs. 


1623]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  105 

The  said  day  Ro»  Dowglas  sone  lau"  to  James  Dowglas  in  Machlinhoill  Prenteis 
is  buiket  prenteis  to  Ro'  Conyghanie  brassmythe  to  serve  vij  zeirs  prenteis 
and  twa  zeirs  for  meitt  and  fie  be  y'  indento''  daitit  ye  xxix  day  of  Octo""  1622. 

Decimo  octavo  De"^  1622. 

The  qlk  day  in  pns  of  ye  deacon  conveinar  and  remanent  deacones  Patrick  xx  lib.  be 
Moteithe  in  nam  and  behalf  of  ye  exec^s  of  vmq'«  Ar"  Russell  delyverit  to  rus^cU." 
George  Bogill    y""  collector    tvventie    pund   left   be  ye  said  vmqle  Ar"*  to    ye 
craftis  hospitall. 

The  said    day    J  ohne  Clark  deacon  of    ye  wobstars  cam  in  ye  deacon  Aganes  Clark. 
conveinar  remanent   deacones  and  y''  counsellis  will  anent  q'  satisfactioun 
and  paymet  he  sail  mak  for  misregarding  ye  deacon  conveinar  and  his  counsell 
in  ye  actioun  betuix  him  and  Ar<i  Patsoun  elder  J  ohne  and  George  Patsounes 
his  twa  sones. 

Decimo  quinto  J  a"'   1623. 

The  said  day  J  ohne  Hendersoun  sone  to  J  ohne  Hendersoun  in  Harlaw  Prenteis 
is  buiket  prenteis  to  James  Hendersoun  tailzeo''  for  ye  space  of  vij  zeirs  be 
his  indento""  daitit  ye  vij  of  De''  1622. 


Hendersone. 


Decimo  Septimo  Fe"^  1623. 

The  said  day  J  ohne  Couper  sone  lau"  to  J  ohne  Couper  in  Busbie  is  buikit  Prenteis 
prenteis  to  Ro*  Watsoun  flescheo''  to  serve  him  vij  zeirs  prenteis  and  twa  °"P'=''- 
zeir  for  meitt  and  fie  be  y""  indento^  daitit  ye  vij  of  Fe""'!  1623. 

Vigesimo  sexto  Martij  1623. 

The  said  day  the  deacon  conveinar  deacones  and  y""  counsell  convenit  Puir  men  in 
in  ye  craftis  hospitall  ressavit  Symon  Baird  and  Johne  M^Ka  to  be  susteinit  ^'^  '"°*P"'^"- 
in  y""  hospitall.     Lykas  yei  maid  faith  that  they  sould  keip  guid  ordo""  and 
ordaines  ye  collecto''  to  pay  to  yame  ane  quarter  paymet  to  Beltane  nixt. 

Vigesimo  secundo  Julij  1623. 

The  said  day  ye  deacon  conveinar  deacones  and  y""  counsell  conveinit  in  Baird  wnlawit 
ye  craftis  hospitall  quhilk  day  anent  ye  complaint  gevin  in  be  ye  deacon  '"  '^"  P"°  ' 
conveinar  againes  Baird  wright  for  his  disobedience  and  misbehavio''  towardis 
ye  deacon  conveinar  they  haveing  taken  sufficient  tryell  y''intill  decernit  and 
ordainet  ye  said  James  Baird  to  pay  to  George  Bogill  collecto''  ten  pund  of 
vnlaw  for  his  wrang  to  be  applyet  to  the  vse  of  ye  puir.  Lykeas  ye  said 
James  com  in  ye  deacon  conveinars  awn  will  anent  q'  satisfactioun  he  cravit 
of  him  for  ye  wrang  in  homage  or  warding  of  his  persoun  conforme  to  his 
awin  declara'un  vi^anent. 


io6 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1623 


Lytis  for 

deikin 

conveinar. 


Prenteis 
M'Key. 


Deikin 
conveinar? 
compt 
[?  couusell. 


Compt  be 
George  Bogle. 


Octavo  Odo''^  1623. 

The  qlk  day  Walter  Dowglas  deacon  conveinar  now  electit  bailzie  being 
conveinit  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  w"i  ye  haill  deacones  auld  and  new  and  y'' 
counsell  for  electing  of  thrie  persounes  to  be  gevin  in  to  ye  counsell  of  yis 
burghe  vpoun  lyte  that  ane  of  yame  micht  be  electit  deacon  conveinar  for  ye 
zeir  to  cum  in  respect  ye  said  Walter  deacon  conveinar  being  chosin  bailzie 
could  not  be  putt  vpoun  lyte  they  be  pluralitie  of  voitts  nominat  and  electit 
Ninia  Andersoun  Johne  Padie  and  James  Mitchell  to  be  vpone  lyte  to  ye 
effect  forsaid  and  ordainet  Williame  Andersoun  and  Williame  Neilsoun  to 
pnt  ye  said  lyte  to  ye  counsell  of  yis  burghe  that  they  micht  mak  choyse  of 
ane  of  the  thrie  to  be  deacon  conveinar  for  ye  zeir  to  cu. 

The  said  day  Donald  Mi^Key  sone  lau"  to  vmqle  Andro  Mi^Key  burges  of 
Stling  is  buikit  heirin  as  he  quha  is  bund  prenteis  to  Duncan  M<^Key  tailzeor 
burges  of  Glasgow  to  serve  him  sevin  zeir  prenteis  and  twa  zeir  for  meitt  and 
fie  be  yf  indentof  dait  ye  .xvij  of  Ja'''J  1623  zers  qlk  was  his  enterie  to  his 
prenteischip. 

Nono  Octo''"  1623. 

The  qlk  day  Johne  Padie  chosin  deacon  conveinar  for  ye  zeir  to  cum 
being  conveinit  in  ye  Trongait  Kirk  he  first  nominat  ye  persounes  vnder- 
yttin  to  be  vpoun  his  counsell  viz  Jo°  Scott  heihirma  Johne  M'^Ildownie 
tailzeo""  Williame  Anderson  cordouner  W""  Hariot  baxter  Alex''  Cauldwell 
skinner  James  ScheUls  cowper  Andro  Myln  chirurgian  Thomas  .\ndersoun 
wobster  James  Colquhoun  wry'  James  Rakein  masoun  Rot  Watsoun  zoung 
flescheo''  Johne  Smythe  bonetmaker  deacones  of  y'  callingis  William  Neilsoun 
zounger  visito'  Gawan  Wilsoun  for  ye  garneris  and  with  yame  Walter  Dowglas, 
bailzie,  Thomas  Morsoun  Ninia  Andersoun  James  Fischer  David  Scheirar 
Gawan  Neisbitt  }o^  Duncan  W"  Luif  James  Sympsoun  Jo"  Andersoun  Ro* 
Watsoun  elder  Johne  Stling  M''  Ro'  Hamiltoun  W™  Howie  Thomas  Fawsyde 
George  Mure  James  Lichbodie  James  Mure  George  Bogill  James  Mitchell 
Thomas  Aitchissoun  Patrick  Colquhoun  Ro'  Hogiszard  and  Ninia  Gilhagie 
zounger  quha  being  pnt  maid  faith  de  fideli  administra' ne  in  y''  office.  Thair- 
efter  ye  deacon  conveinar  deacones  and  y'  counsell  be  pluralitie  of  voittis 
electit  and  nominat  Thomas  Morsoun  lait  baUzie  Ninia  Andersoun  James 
Fischer  and  Gawan  Neisbitt  to  be  vpoun  ye  dean  of  gildis  counsell  for  ye  zeir 
to  cum  and  to  be  pntit  to  him  be  ye  deacon  conveinar  according  to  ye  Ire  of 
gildrie. 

Vigesimo  secundo  Odo'"'  1623. 

The  said  day  ye  deacon  conveinar  deacones  y"'  counsell  being  conveinit 
in  ye  craftis  hospitall  for  heiring  of  George  Bogill  y""  collector  his  compt  of 
his  intromissioun  with  ye  hospitallis  rent  fra  Mertimes  1622  to  Mertimes  nixt 


i623]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  107 

1623  zeiris  quhilk  compt  chairge  and  discharge  being  producit  be  him  be  ye 
qlk  he  chargit  himself  with  Myntois  anuell  and  remanent  particulars  not 
gottin  m  be  him  in  his  last  compt  sa  far  as  he  gatt  in  y''of  extending  to  xxxvij  I1 
iiij  d.  Item  with  ye  auld  and  new  rentalls  beddis  of  ye  bak  almoushous  ye 
few  deuteis  addebtit  be  M'  Ro'  Herbertsoun  Euphame  Wilsoun  Johne  Dobbie 
Hew  Blair  Agnes  Steill  Andro  Haddowie  and  vmqle  Thomas  Mures  teneme^is 
extending  to  ijt'xvij  ti  xvj  s.  ij  d.  Item  with  for  ye  anuell  of  ye  prin'i  sowmes 
addebtit  to  ya  mentionat  in  ye  last  compt  extending  to  iij<^xxvj  tl  and  with 
twentie  pund  of  legacie  payit  be  ye  ex'^s  of  vmqle  Archibald  Russell  and  vy'' 
XX  li  payit  be  ye  ex''s  of  vmqle  David  Sklaitf  and  with  ye  haill  mo'^y  gottin 
for  ye  mortclaith  metionat  in  compt  extending  w'  ye  saids  legacies  to  Ixj  ti 
xij  s.  and  xxiij  ti  xij  s.  vj  d.  gottin  in  be  him  fra  ye  burgess  ressavit  ye  sd  zeir 
being  ye  compters  haill  charge  extending  de  claro  comptit  togidder  to  vj^^lxxvij  li 
ix  s.  xd.  and  be  ye  said  compt  he  exonerit  himself  of  Ixxxvj  ti  vj  s.  restand 
in  to  him  of  ye  last  compt  and  of  ye  sowmes  debursit  be  him  for  sustenta^un 
of  ye  puir  in  ye  hospitall  y''  fialls  M^  George  Semplis  anuell  his  awin  fiall  ye 
dark  and  offi^s  fialls  and  vyer  necess""  chargis  debursit  be  him  metionat  in 
his  compt  and  allowit  conforme  y^to  his  haill  chairge  and  exonera^un  extendis 
to  v'^iij  ti  viij  s.  Swa  his  charge  and  discharge  being  conferrit  he  is  fund 
instlie  auchtand  in  to  yame  the  sowme  of  j'^lxxiij  tl  is.  lod.  quhilk  being  payit 
be  him  to  yame  they  exoner  and  discharge  ye  sd  George  collecto""  of  his 
intromissioun  w*'>  ye  sd  comoun  rent  ye  sd  zeir  provyding  alwayes  he  mak 
thame  thankfull  paymet  of  ye  superplus  of  his  compt  foirsaid. 

The  said  day  ye  keyis  of    ye  box  gevin  to  Williame    Neilsoune  visito""  bo.\  m's. 
Gawan  Neisbitt  and  Williame  Anderson  to  be  producit  at  ye  nixt  electioun. 

The  said  day  George  Bogill  is  electit  collector  of  ye  said  hospitallis  rent  Bogle 
for  ye  zeir  to  cum  quha  acceptit  ye  said  office  in  and  vpoun  [himself]  and  maid  '=°"^'='°'- 
faithe  de  fideli  adminislra~ iie  y'intill. 

The  said  day  Patrick  Lenzeis  and  Michaell  Rankein  is  ressavit  in  ye  craftis  puir  men  in 
hospitall  to  be  sustenit  yfintill  and  hes  maid  faith  for  keiping  of  guid  ordo'  ^^  hospitaU. 
as  accordis. 

Vigesimo  quarto  De's  1623. 

The  said  day  ye  deacon  conveinar  deacones  and  y^'  counsell  being  conveinit  Andirsone 
in  ye  craftis  hospitall  for  electing  of  ane  new  collecto""  for  ingaddering  of  ye  '=°'''='='°'- 
hospitalls  rent  in  respect  of  George  Bogill  his  deceis  they  all  in  ane  voyce 
have  electit  and  choisin  Williame  Andersoun  cordouner  thair  collector  quhill 
Mertimes  nixtocum  quha  acceptit  ye  sd  office  in  and  vpoun  him  and  maid 
faith  de  fideli  administratione  yairintill. 

The  said  day  anent  ye  complaint  gevin  in  be  Ar*!  Paterson  and  his  colligis  Decreit  aganes 
in  name  of  ye  wobster  craft  againes  Johne  Clark  and  his  maisters  of  craft  ''^  mobsters. 


io8 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1623 


Prenteis 
Crauiurd. 


for  outtaking  ane  band  out  of  ye  box  mad  to  yame  be  Finlay  Moresoun  of  fyftie 
punds  and  \-plifting  y''of  being  yair  comoun  guid  quhilk  being  referrit  to  ye 
deacon  coveinar  deacones  and  y^  counsell  they  eftir  tryall  takin  y^intill  decernit 
and  ordanet  3'e  sd  Johne  Clark  to  pay  ten  pund  and  ilk  ane  of  his  masters  of 
craft  viz  George  Schirj-law  Johne  Baird  James  Greinlaw  Johne  Rodger  Johne 
Br5-ssoun  Jo"  Finlay  James  Winzett  Williame  Reid  Thomas  Andersoun  Alex'' 
WUsoun  Ok  ane  of  yame  iiij  ll  mo^y  in  respect  yei  war  pairtneris  in  vplifting 
ye  said  sowme  extending  to  fyftie  pund  to  be  payit  to  ye  pnt  deacon  and 
maisters  of  craft  as  y""  comoun  guid  to  be  putt  out  to  ye  weill  of  yair  craft. 

The  said  day  WLUiame  Craufurde  sone  lau"  to  vmqle  James  Craufurde  of 
(  )  is  buikit  heirin  as  he  quha  is  bund  prenteis  to  Johne  Mun 

tailzeo''  burges  of  Glasgow  to  serve  him  sevin  zeir  prenteis  and  twa  zeir  for 
meitt  and  fie  be  y""  indento''  of  ye  dait  ye  xxiij  of  DC  1623. 


Prenteis 
Kiocaid. 


Prenteis 
Holme. 


Prenteis 
Fergusoun. 


Lytls  for  ye 

deikin 

conveinar. 


xxii]  J  a'''  1624. 

The  said  day  David  Kincaid  sone  to  vmqi^  Johne  Kincaid  of  Auchin- 
rivoche  is  buikit  heirin  printeis  to  Jo°  Clark  zounger  tailzeo''  burges  of  Glasgow 
to  serve  him  fywe  zer  printeis  and  twa  zer  for  meitt  and  fie  be  his  indento'' 
of  ye  dait  ye  xxiij  of  Ja'J  1624. 

Primo  Marti]  1624. 

The  sd  day  Williame  Holmes  is  buikit  heirin  as  prenteis  to  Ro'  Cochraine 
fiescheo"'  to  serve  him  vij  zer  as  prenteis  and  twa  zer  for  meitt  and  fie  be  y' 
indento^  of  ye  dait  ye  xxiij  day  of  Fe^J  1624. 

Decimo  nono  J ulij  1624. 

The  said  daj'  James  Fergussoun  sone  to  vmqle  Alia  Fergussoun  in  Ardein 
is  buikit  heirin  as  he  quha  is  bund  prenteis  to  Johne  Wallace  maltma  to  serve 
him  sevin  zer  prenteis  and  twa  zer  for  meitt  and  fie  be  v''  indento''  of  ye  dait 
of  yir  pntis. 

Decimo  tertio  Octo^  1624. 

The  qlk  day  Johne  Padie  deacon  conveinar  now  electit  baUzie  being 
convenit  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  with  ye  haill  deacones  auld  and  new  and  y' 
counsell  for  electing  of  thrie  persounes  to  be  gevin  in  to  ye  counsell  of  j-is 
burghe  vpoun  lyte  that  ane  of  yame  may  be  electit  deacon  conveinar  for  ye 
zeir  to  cum  in  respect  ye  pnt  deacon  conveinar  being  bailzie  cannot  be  vpoun 
lyte  to  yat  effect  they  be  pluralitie  of  voittis  have  nominat  and  electit  Ninian 
Andersoun  Davad  Scheirar  and  Gawan  Neisbitt  to  be  vpoun  lyte  to  ye  effect 
foirsaid  and  ordaines  ^^'illiame  Andersoune  and  Johne  Luife  to  pnt  ye  said 
lyte  to  ye  proveist  bailzies  and  counsell  of  ye  sd  burghe  that  ane  of  ye  thrie 
may  be  chosin  in  counsell  deacon  conveinar  for  ye  zer  to  cum. 


i624]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  109 

Decimo  quarto  Odo^  1624. 
The  said  day  David  Scheirar  newlie  electit  deacon  conveinar  for  ye  zeir  Deikin 
to  cum  conveinit  in  ye  tolbuithe  of  Glasgow  with  ye  haill  deacones  of    yis  coHnseii. 
bur«  for  electing  of  his  counsell  he  nominat  ye  persounes  vnderwttin  to  be 
vpoun  his  counsell  till  Michaelmes  nixt  viz  Gabriell  Smythe  hailierma  Richard 
Allan  cordouner  Thomas  Scott   baxter  Gawan   Neisbitt   tailzeof  Ro'  Howie 
couper  Johne  Baird  wobster  Patrick  Colquhoun  wry'  Johne  Boyd  masoun 
Johne   Luife  skyner   Johne   Hall   chyrurgia   Ro*  Watsoun   zounger  flescheo' 
Willia  Cumyg  bonetmaker  W™  Neilsoun  zounger  visito""  Johne  Machan  for  ye 
gairneris  and  with  yame  Johne  Padie,  bailzie,  Thomas  Morsoun  Walter  Dowglas 
Ninia  Andersoun  James  Fischer  elder  Johne  Duncan  James  Symsoun  Johne 
Andersoun  elder  Ro'  Watsoun  elder  M'  Ro'  Hamiltoun  Jo°  Stirling  Williame 
Howie  Thomas  Fawsyd  George  Mure    James  Lichtbodie  James   Mure  James 
Mitchell  James  Colquhoun  Thomas  Aitchesoun  Ro'  Hogiszaird. 

Thaireftir  ye  deacon  conveinar  deacones  and  y''  counsell  be  pluralitie  of  Four  persones 
voittis  electit  and  nominat  Thomas  Morsoun  Walter  Dowglas  Williame  Neilsoun  ""gifd  ^*" 
zounger  and  Johne  Andersoun  elder  to  be  vpoun  ye  dean  of  gild  his  counsell  counsell. 
for  ye  zeir  to  cum  and  to  be  pntit  to  him  be  ye  deacon  conveinar  conforme 
to  ye  Ire  of  gildrie. 

Decimo  Septimo  No"'  1624. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacon  conveinar  deacones  and  y''  counsell  being  conveinit  Compt 
in  ye  craftis  hospitall  for  heiring  and  perfyting  of  WiUiame  Andersoune  y'' 
collecto"'  his  compt  with  y"'  sd  hospitall  rent  fra  ye  tym  he  was  electit  to  Mtimes 
last  bypast  quha  compeirit  and  producit  his  said  compt  be  ye  qlk  he  chargit 
himself  onlie  with  sick  pairt  of  ye  deutie  of  y'  auld  and  new  rentalls  and 
anuells  of  y'  mo^y  that  he  had  ressavit  ane  hundrethe  marks  prin'i  vpliftit 
be  him  fra  James  Walker  as  his  particular  compt  beiris  in  respect  vmq'«  George 
Bogill  collector  befoir  him  had  vpliftit  ane  pairt  of  ye  sd  zeiris  rent  not  comptit 
for  being  desperat  his  particular  intromissioun  forsaid  extending  to  v<^lxxix  ll 
XV  s.  iiij  d.  comptit  y^with  xx  1i  x  s.  gottin  in  be  him  for  ye  mortclaithe  all 
wryttin  and  sett  doun  be  him  with  his  awin  hand  being  his  haill  charge 
extending  as  said  is  and  be  his  discharge  and  exonera^un  e.xonerit  himself 
of  ye  haill  sowmes  debursit  be  him  for  sustenta^un  of  ye  puir  yair  habuilzemet 
and  elding  w'  George  Semplis  aiiuel  to  Johne  Craig  for  ane  burso^  and  vyer 
necessr  expenss  debursit  be  him  mentionat  in  compt  and  ane  hundrethe  markis 
sett  out  be  him  to  Johne  Andersoun  and  thrie  scoir  ten  markis  to  mak  out 
Williame  Conyghames  thrie  hundrethe  markis  yair  twa  bandis  being  lent 
out  as  y''  comoun  guid  and  they  bind  to  pay  ye  saids  sowmes  to  ye  deacon 
conveinar  deacones  and  y^  counsell  quhilk  haill  sowmes  debursit  be  him 
extendis  de  daro  to  v^iij  li  xvj  s.  Swa  chairge  and  discharge  being  conferrit 
the  said  William  is  fund  restand  auchtand  of  his  compt  Ixxv  ti  xix  s.  iiij  d. 
q^of  they  have  allowit  to  him  xx  li  for  his  fiall  and  als  ye  particular  few  dewties 


no 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1624 


iiij  lib.  (or 
Colquhoun. 


Puir  in  ye 

craftis 

hospitall. 


Braidwood 
Clark. 


Prenteis 
Clark. 


and  Snuells  following  addebtit  to  yame  be  ye  persounes  eftspeit  for  ye  sd  zer 
viz  be  ye  airs  of  vmqle  Hew  Blair  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  be  M''  George  Clydisdeill 
xliij  s.  iiij  d.  be  Johne  Howie  xx  s.  Artho''  Allanis  hous  in  Brigait  x  s.  Bessie 
Colveinis  wast  xij  s.  Cochnochs  bomes  sted  xxiij  s.  George  Hutchesounes 
tenemet  in  Trongait  xx  s.  out  of  S''  George  Elphinstones  borne  v  s.  Johne 
Capbells  twa  bomes  at  ye  west  poirt  viij  s.  Mareoun  \\'alkers  hous  vj  s.  the 
teynd  borne  v  s.  to  be  vpliftit  and  intromettit  with  be  him  sa  far  as  he  can 
gett  y''of  to  his  awin  vse  by  his  fiall  and  yat  to  Mertimes  last  bypast  allaiilie 
and  yairfoir  ye  deacone  conveinar  deacones  and  y''  counsell  exoneris  and 
dischargis  ye  sd  Williame  of  his  intromissioun  with  ye  sd  rent  fra  Mertimes 
1623  to  Mertimes  1624  zeirs  pro\'y^ding  always  he  mak  yame  thankfull  pay- 
met  of  ye  superplus  restand  of  his  compt  extending  to  Iv  1i  xix  s.  iiij  d.  as 
zit  not  payit  be  him  to  yame  conforme  yairto. 

Nota  they  ordaine  four  pund  to  be  gevin  to  Patrick  Colquhoun  for  his 
work  and  bell  stock  drest  be  him. 

The  said  Robert  Berrell  and  Bartelmo  Mure  was  ressavit  in  ye  craftis 
hospitall  to  be  susteinit  yairintill  quha  maid  faith  to  keip  guid  ordor. 

Nona  Februarij  1625. 

The  qlk  day  \-e  deacon  conveinar  deacones  and  y''  counsell  being  con- 
veinit  in  ve  counselhous  of  ve  burghe  of  Glasgow  for  electing  of  y""  dark  in 
respect  M''  Johne  Hutchesoun  quha  was  y^  ordinar  dark  is  electit  dark  of 
ye  said  burghe  and  dimittit  ye  samy  thairfoir  they  all  in  ane  vojxe  electit 
and  nominat  James  Braidwode  notar  yair  ordinar  dark  to  ye  nixt  electioun 
of  ye  deacon  conveinar  eftir  Michaelmes  quha  being  pnt  acceptit  ye  said  office 
in  and  vpoun  him  and  maid  faith  de  fideli  administratione  yairintill  and  to 
be  zeirlie  electit  conforme  to  ye  ordo''  of  servic  yairanent. 

9  of  Fehruar  1625. 

The  said  day  James  Clerk  sone  to  W™  Clerk  in  Achinreath  is  buikit 
printeis  to  serve  Edward  Leicheman  sevin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris 
for  meit  and  fie  y'eftir  conforme  to  y''  indento"'  of  the  dait  of  yir  pntis. 


6  Aprilis   1625. 
Puir  man  in  ye  The  qlk  day  ye  deikin  conveinar  and  remanent    deikins  hes  admittit 

alznoushous.       .  _,,.  ,  ,  ,,  ,.  ,  , 

LauTance  Schaw  to  be  in  ye  almoushous  and  have  his  portion  w'  ye  rest  01 
ye  puir  fra  Beltane  and  ye  collector  to  buy  him  ane  gowne. 

Prima  Junij  1625. 
Prenteis  Luif.  xhe  qlk  day  Johne  Luif  is  buikit  prenteis  to  serve  James  Rowane  skjmner 

burges  of  Glasgow  for  ye  space  of  fyve  zeiris  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie 
conforme  to  yair  indento'  daitit  ye  xj  of  Maij  1625. 


1625]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  iii 

The  said  day  James  Steill  is  buikit  prenteis  to  serve  Ro'  Steill  skynner  Prenteis 
burges  of  Glasgow  sevin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  con-     '^'  ' 
forme  to  y''  indento'  daitit  ye  said  first  day  of  Junij. 


xiij  of  Junij  1625. 

The  qlk  day  Ro'  Zog""  sone  to  vmqle  M''  Thomas  Zog''  minister  at  Inneskip  Prenteis  Zog'. 
is  buikit  prenteis  to  serve  Ro'  Thomesoun  tailzour  burges  of  Glasgow  for  sevin 
zeiris  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  y'  indento"'  of  ye  dait  ye 
XXX  day  of  Ja'  1625  zeiris. 

Penultimo  J ulij  1625. 

The  qlk  day  Ro*  Murdoche  sone  lawful!  to  wmqle  Ro'  Murdoche  cowper  Prenteis 
burges  of  Glasgow  is  buikit  prenteis  to  Henrie  Smy'  skynner  for  ye  space  of 
fywe  zeiris  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  y^  indentof  of  ye  dait 
of  yir  pntis. 

Duodecimo  Odohris  1625. 

The  qlk  day  Dauid  Scheirar  deikin  conveiner  being  conveinit  at  ye  Lytis  for 
almoushous  w*  ye  remanent  deikins  and  breyrein  of  his  counsall  for  electing  conveinar. 
and  chusing  twa  men  w'  himself  to  be  voittit  be  ye  proueist  bailleis  and 
counsall  qlk  of  yam  salbe  deikin  conveinar  for  ye  zeir  to  cum  quha  be  pluralitie 
of  voittis  electit  and  chuise  W™  Neilsoun  zog''  and  Gawane  Neisbit  zog''  w' 
ye  said  Dauid  Scheirar  to  be  gevin  to  ye  proueist  bailleis  and  counsell  be  W"" 
Andirsoun  cordoner  and  Jo°  Love  y'  to  be  voittit  be  yame  yat  ane  of  ye  thrie 
may  be  deikin  conveinar  for  ye  zeir  to  cum. 

xiij  of  October  1625. 

The  said  day  W""  Neilsoun  zog^  pnt  deikin  conveinar  being  conveinit  in  Four  persona 
ye  tolbuithe  for  electing  four  men  to  be  wpone  ye  dean  of  gildis  counsall  quha  ""gikis^^ 
be  pluralitie  of  voittis  electit  Thomas  Morsoun  Niniane  Andirsoun  W""  Howie  ""ounseil. 
and  Patrik  Colquhoun  to  be  wpone  ye  dean  of  gildis  counsall  for  ye  zeir  to 
cume. 

And  siclyk  ye  said  \N"^  Neilsoun  being  conveinit  for  ye  electing  of  his  Deikin 
counsall  electit  ye  persones  wnderwryttin  viz  ye  haill  deiks  Gabriell  Smythe  counse"h" 
Patrik  Clerk  W"'  Heriot  Gawane  Neisbit  zog^  \V">  Andirsoun  Jo"  Love  Ro' 
Howie  Jon  Boyd  Ro'  Mwre  Ro'  Watsoun  elder  Jo"  Hall  Jo"  Smythe  Jo" 
Govane  Jo"  Crawfurd  and  w'  yame  Jo"  Padie  Thomas  Morsoun  Dauid  Scheirar 
Niniane  Andirsoun  Waltir  Dowglas  Jo"  Duncane  W"'  Stalker  Jo"  Baird 
Thomas  Fawsyd  elder  James  Mitchell  W""  Howie  W™  Neilsoun  elder  James 
Ly'bodie  Niniane  Gilhagie  Alex''  Cauldwall  Ritchart  Allan  Ro'  M^Cuir  Patrik 
Colquhoun  Ro'  Watsoun  zog^  Andro  Mylne  George  Mwre  James  Simpsoun 
James  Padie  James  Mwre  Jo"  Ferrier  Thomas  Scott. 


112 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1625 


Deikin 
conveinar  to 
be  collecto' 
also. 


xxviij  of  October  1626  [?  1625]. 

The  qlk  day  the  haill  deikins  and  brejTein  of  ye  deikin  conveinars  counsall 
heo  flectit  [sic]  W"  Neilsoun  hes  taine  wpone  him  to  ingather  ye  puirs  geir 
for  ye  zeir  to  cum  and  hes  concludeit  all  in  ane  voice  that  q'sumevir  persone 
beis  electit  deikin  conveinar  for  ye  tyme  to  cum  sail  lykwayes  collect  yt  samyn 
or  wyfwayis  gif  yai  mack  ony  collecto''  yat  ye  deikin  conveinar  cheusar  of  ye 
said  collecto"'  sail  paj'  for  ye  collecto''  wpone  his  awin  chargis  and  be  anserabill 
for  ye  samyn. 


Compt 
Andirsone. 


The  said  day  the  deikin  conveinar  deikinis  and  y''  counsall  being  con- 
veinit  in  ye  craftis  almoushous  for  heiring  of  W""  Andirsone  his  compt  w' 
ye  hospitall  rent  fra  ye  tyme  he  was  electit  ye  last  zeir  to  ye  day  and  dait  of 
yir  pntis  quha  compeirit  and  chargeit  himself  be  ye  particular  charge  wndir- 
writtin  viz  he  charges  himself  of  ye  auld  and  new  rentall  qlk  he  ressaueit 

xlix  li  iiij  s.  x  d. 


Item  frome  ye  deikins  of  y""  qrter  comptis  .  .  .  j'^lvj  1l 

Item  restand  of  his  compt  ye  zeir  preceiding  .  .  .  Ivj  ■& 

Item  frome  Ladieland  for  ye  anwall  of  four  hunderithe  merks  to  Mertimes 

1625  .....  xxv]  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  frome  Charlis  Mowat  for  ye  anwaU  of  four   hunderithe  merks  to  ye  said 

terme  .....  xxvj  1  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  frome  ye  Laird  of  Silvirtounhill  for  ye  anwall  of  fyve  hunderithe  pund  to 

ye  said  terme  .  .  .  .  .  .  1  ■& 

Mair  ressaueit  frome  him  of  superplus  qlk  is  mair  nor  ye  fyve  hunderithe  pund 

conteinit  in  his  band  .  .  .  .  .  .  Ix  ll 

Item  frome  Eliezar  Hamiltoun  for  ye  anwall  of  four  scoir  punds  to  ye  said 

Mertimes         .......  viij  'll 

Item  frome  Jo"  Hainiltoun  for  ye  anwall  of  four  scoir  vj  ti  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

viij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  fra  Johnne  Scott  for  ye  anwall  of  fyve  hunderithe  punds  fra  Mertimes 

1624  to  Witsounday  1625  .....  xxv  ll 
Item  frome  Ro'  Finlayis  e.\''is  of  legacie  .  .  .  .  xx  ll 
Item  fra  Jo"*  Vallance  ex"'is  of  legacie  .  .  xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  fra  Malcam  Crawfurd  for  ye  anwall  of  fyve  hunderithe  merks  to  Mertimes 

nixt  .....  xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  ]o^  Love  for  ye  anwall  of  four  hunderithe  merks  fra  Witsounday 

1625  to  Witsounday  1626  .  .  .  x.xvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  fra  Jo"  Andirsoun  for  ye  burgessis  .  xxij  ll  v  s.  viiij  d. 
Item  for  ye  moirtclaithe     .              .              .              .              .  x  li  xvj  s. 

Sufiia  of  ye  charge     .  .  .         v<=lxxxxij  ll  xiij  s.  ij  d. 


i625]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


"3 


Discharge. 

Item  ye  comptar  discharges  himself  of  ye  particular  sowmes  of  money  wndir- 

wryttin  dehursit  be  him  in  manir  eftirspeit  viz  : 

In  the  first   to  ye  sax  puir  men  in  ye  hospitall  everie  ane  of  yame  fourtie 


merks      .......         inde 

Item  to  M'  George  Sempill  .  .  .  Ixvj  li  xiij  s, 

Item  to  ye  colledge  for  ye  bursC  .  .  .  Ixvj  li  xiij  s 

Item  to  M'  George  Sempill  for  his  denner  and  deikinis  yat  was  w'  him 

Mair  to  him  ane  wy""  tyme  <. 

Item  to  Jo"  Dalrimpill  tailzour 

To  Lawrance  Schaw  be  ane  warrand 

To  Jo"  Mm-e  be  ane  warrand 

To  Patrik  Colquhoun 

Item  to  Symone  Baird  for  four  ells  of  gray  claithe 

Mair  for  ye  making  of  it    . 

Item  for  ane  blew  gowne  to  Bartie  Mwre 

Item  restand  of  Jo"  Scotts  Ires 

Item  to  Jo°  Stirling 

Item  to  ane  he  watts  not  quhome 

To  ye  said  Lawrance  Schaw  be  ane  warrad 

Item  to  ye  sax  men  yat  red  to  ye  Laird  Cartvalls  buriall 

Item  for  ane  harrill  and  schafting  of  it 

Item  to  Jo"  Ramsay  for  chargeing  of  Minto 

Item  to  Patrik  Vries  wyf  at  ye  deikin  conveiners  comand 

Item  for  ye  calsie  befoir  ye  almoushous 

Item  for  drink  to  j^ame 

Item  to  Dauid  Pollock  of  ye  Newtoun  of  Mers 

Item  for  four  daills  to  dress  ye  hous  and  bedds 

Mair  for  sawing  of  yame    . 

Mair  for  twa  hunderithe  plencheo'  naills 

Mair  for  twa  hunderithe  fyloring  naills 

To  Jo"  Reid  for  his  work  . 

Mair  for  drink  and  breid  to  yame 

Item  at  ye  ressait  of  Myntois  silvir 

Item  for  leid 

Item  to  W"»  Calderwood  o& 

To  Helein  Smy*  conforme  to  ane  warrand  .  .      iij  ll 

To  Jo"  Mwre  be  ane  warrand 

Item  for  ye  seitt  befoir  ye  hous 

Item  for  ane  gowne  to  Lawrance  Schaw 

Mair  for  ye  making  of  it    . 

Item  for  twa  pair  of  schone  to  Dauid  Calderwood 

Mair  to  him  at  ve  mwster  .  .  .  •       'ij 

H 


jclx  li 

iiij  d. 

iiij  d. 

iij  1i 

XXX  s. 

iiij  ll 

xl  s. 

xl  s. 

iiij  ll 

vj  li 

xij  s. 

xiij  s.    iiij  d. 

vj  s. 

xli 

xl  s. 

xl  s. 

vj  li 

xs. 

XX  s. 

XX  s. 

viij  li 

iiij  d. 

j'^xx  li 

xlviij  s. 

viij  s. 

XX  s. 

iiij  d. 

viij  d. 

xij  s 

xij  s. 

iiij  s. 

iiij  li 

viij  d. 

xl  s. 

iiij  ll  ix  s. 

xH 

xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xlviij  s. 

ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 


xuj  s. 


xnj  s. 
Ivj  s. 


V]  s. 


114 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[162= 


Prenteis 
Andirsone. 


Mwre. 


XVU]  S. 
XXXVJ  S. 

xij  s. 

vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xviij  s. 

xij  s. 

iiij  ll 

vj  s. 

XX  s. 

xvij  li 


Item  for  ye  red  taking  away  befoir  ye  hous 

Item  for  sevin  laid  of  lyme  to  poynt  ye  hous 

Item  for  sand  to  ye  lyme  . 

Item  for  four  ells  gray  claithe  to  Patrik  Leinzeis 

Mair  for  thrie  ells  of  hardin  to  lyne  ya 

Mair  for  ye  making  of  ya  . 

To  Mathow  Ker  for  his  fie 

Item  gevin  furthe  for  psewing  of  James  Stewartis  wyf 

Item  to  Jo^  Ramsay  for  ye  chargeing  Forquhair  and  his  cau^is 

Item  for  coillis  and  peittis  to  ye  hous         .... 

Item  for  ye  seasing  Ires  aganes  Forq''  and  his  caui'ls  .xlviij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  ye  clerk  for  his  feall  ....    .xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Suma  of  ye  discharge  .  .  v<=lxix  li  xij  s.  viij  d. 

Charge  and  discharge  being  conferrit  ye  comptar  restis  awand 

xiij  li  vj  d. 

Quhilk  threttein  pund  sax  penneis  the  deikin  conveinar  and  deikins  and 
breyrein  of  his  counsall  foirsaid  hes  gevin  the  said  W™  Andirsoun  for  his  feall 
togidder  w'  the  sowme  of  ten  punds  money  out  of  ye  sowme  of  fourtie  thrie 
pund  qlk  was  in  ye  box  and  the  threttie  thrie  pund  qlk  restit  of  ye  said  fourtie 
thrie  pund  William  Neilsoun  deikin  conveinar  tuik  intromissioun  y^'w'  and 
obleist  him  to  be  comptabill  y'foir  and  hes  lykwa^ns  dischargit  and  be  yir 
pntis  dischargis  the  said  W""  Andirsoun  of  his  intromissiones  w*  ye  puir  of  ye 
said  hospitalls  geir  fra  ye  last  zeirs  electioun  to  ye  day  and  dait  of  yir  pntis 
for  now  and  evir. 

xviif  of  No'  1625. 

The  qlk  day  Ro'  Andirsoun  sone  to  Murane  Andirsoun  spous  to  Cristiane 
Duk  is  buikit  prenteis  to  serve  Jo°  Schanks  tailzour  in  ye  tailzour  craft  fyve 
zeiris  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  fra  ye  dait  of  ye  indento^  of  ye 
dait  at  Glasgow  ye  first  day  of  No^  1625  zeiris  instant. 

22  of  Febniar  1626. 

The  qlk  day  George  Mwre  zog"^  of  his  cheratie  of  his  bygane  voyadgis 
delyuerit  ye  deikin  conveinar  fyve  pund  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  to  be  gevin  to  ye  puir. 

Prima  Martif  1626. 

The  qlk  day  anent  ye  complaint  gevin  in  be  Jo°  Crawfurd  visito'  of  ye 
maltman  aganes  Ro'  Watsoun  makand  mentioun  that  the  said  Jo°  Crawfurd 
being  in  Alex''  Colquhon  his  hous  w'  ye  deikin  conveinar  and  diuers  honest 
men  anent  y''  awin  adois  and  haveing  na  evill  in  y^  myds  the  said  [Robert] 
come  in  q'  yai  war  sitting  and  eftir  he  had  sittin  a  quhyle  the  visito'  requyrit 
ye  said  Ro'  ye  aucht  penneis  for  ilk  making  of  malt  he  had  maid  fra  his  entrie 
quha  anserit  the  said  visito""  he  wald  not  pay  ane  pennie  and  yai  I  and  my 


i626]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  115 

bre3Tein  was  new  come  ovir  and  yat  he  w'  ye  ellevin  deikins  broicht  ws  in 
and  vvy''  malicious  speitchis  qlk  complaint  being  hard  and  considerit  be  ye 
said  dekin  conveinar  and  remanent  deikins  and  being  sufficientlie  qualifeit 
the  said  deikin  conveinar  and  remanent  deikins  and  breyrein  foirsaid  statutes 
and  ordeanes  yat  gif  evir  the  said  Ro'  in  ony  tyme  heireftir  vse  ye  lyk  speitchis 
to  ony  of  ye  breyrein  he  sail  pay  xx  li  to  ye  puir  eftir  ye  tryall  y^'of  and  nevir 
to  beir  office. 

Jacobus   Braidwood  noi'lus. 

The  said  day  ye  deikin  conveinar  remanent  deikins  and  brethrein  of  y''  Act  of 
counsall    being  conveinit   in   ye  almoushous  ordainet    Jo°  Crawfurd  sone  to  crawfurd'to 
Ro'  Crawfurd  maltma  burges  of  Glasgow  to  haue  ye  gift  of  burssorie  in  ye  ^^  ^^'^ 
CoUedge  of  Glasgow  to  be  susteinit  y''in  fra  his  entrie  qlk  salbe  at  Michellmes 
nixt. 

XXV  of  Marche  1626. 

The  qlk  day  the  deikin  conveinar  remanent  deikins  and  breyrein  of  his  Decreit  aganes 
counsall  being  conveinit  in  ye  New  Kirk  anent  the  complaint  gevin  in  be  Patrik  i.^^jvar.'^ 
Clerk  deikin  of  ye  weivaris  aganes  Jo"  Clerk  his  broyr  Jqu  Finlay  and  John 
Kirlie  makand  mentioun  that  q"'  the  said  deikin  being  in  W™  Flemyngis  hous 
w*  diuers  honest  men  and  haveing  na  evill  in  his  mynd  qlk  was  about  Candilmes 
last  was  that  Jo"  Kirlie  come  to  him  q''  he  was  sittand  and  inquyrit  him  q' 
he  had  ado  w'  Nieill  Steinstoun  and  haveing  anserit  him  naying  bot  honestie 
quha  y^eftir  said  he  was  bot  an  huir  sone  and  his  sleave  and  ye  said  deikin 
ansering  him  in  modestie  yat  he  was  [in]  the  wrong  in  vtering  sick  speitchis 
quha  yi'eftir  anserit  him  he  sould  geit  na  mends  and  yat  ye  deikin  was  ane 
huir  sone  and  ruggit  out  his  baird  punsit  him  w*  his  feit  and  abusit  his  wyf 
and  bluidit  ye  deikin  upon  ye  hand,  and  siclyk  the  deikin  being  in  M''  W™ 
Stewartis  hous  wpone  Tysday  the  xxj  of  Merche  w'  W">  Calderwood  drinkand 
ane  pynt  of  aill  and  Jo°  Clerk  and  Jo"  Finlay  being  y'  come  frome  y''  awin 
tabOl  and  wald  tarie  w'  the  said  deikin  quha  was  verie  weill  acceptit  of  be  ye 
deikin  and  eftir  the  saids  persones  had  sittin  ane  litill  space  the  said  Jo" 
Clerk  begane  and  said  to  ye  said  deikin  Tempiltounes  guid  sone  is  thow  of 
intentioun  to  mak  Jo"  Baird  deikin  and  gif  that  ye  deikin  war  hangit  and 
all  yat  wald  tack  his  pairt  he  sould  not  be  deikin  and  yat  he  sould  be  deikin 
himself  and  mair  and  ye  said  deikin  haveing  not  the  lyk  in  his  mynd  keipit 
silence  qlk  offendit  beathe  ye  said  Jo"  Clerk  and  Jo"  Findlay  and  maid  yame 
beithe  to  vter  ye  foirsaid  speitchis  and  ye  said  Jo"  Clerk  heiring  ye  said  Jo" 
Finlay  of  his  mynd  and  intentioun  bad  him  say  on  for  gif  the  deikm  war  hangit 
and  al  yat  wald  tack  his  pairt  he  sould  not  gett  mendis  of  him  nor  Jo"  Kirlie 
qlk  maid  the  said  Jo"  Finlay  to  vter  ye  said  speitchis,  qlk  complaint  being 
hard  be  ye  said  deikin  conveinar  remanent  deikins  and  breyrein  of  his  counsall 
ye  said  Jo"  Kirlie  and  Jo"  Finlay  being  pnt  and  ye  said    Jo"  Clark    being 


ii6 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1626 


psonallie  wameit  contemnand  ye  off  wald  not  compeir  to  ye  said  deikin 
conveinar  his  judicatorie  the  haill  bill  being  sufficientlie  provin  be  famous 
witnessis  the  said  deikin  conveinar  remanent  deikins  and  brejTein  of  his 
counsall  foirsaid  all  in  ane  voice  decernes  and  ordeanes  the  said  Johnne  Clerk 
nevir  to  be  wameit  be  the  pnt  deikin  nor  na  deikin  yat  sail  happin  to  [be] 
electit  in  tyme  cumying  qi'by  he  be  not  repute  ane  broy''  amangis  yame  and 
ye  deikin  yat  in  ony  tyme  heireftir  sail  convein  ye  said  Jo"  w'  the  rest  or  giihs 
him  ony  office  or  voitt  in  craft  sail  pay  to  ye  puir  of  ye  hospitall  xx  I1  toties 
quoties  eftir  ye  samy  beis  qualifeit  and  yat  foir  his  foirsaids  words  and  contemp 
of  ye  deikin  conveinar  and  sicklj-k  decernes  ye  said  ]o^  Finlay  and  Jo°  Kirlie 
to  sitt  downe  in  ye  New  Kirk  and  crave  ye  deikin  pardoun  and  remaine  in 
waird  during  ye  deikin  conveinars  will  and  yat  nane  of  ^-ame  haue  voitt  in 
craft  for  thrie  zeirs  and  everie  ane  of  yame  to  pay  to  ye  puir  fywe  punds. 


Prenteis 
Forthick. 


Sexto  Maij  1626. 

The  said  day  Arthour  Forthick  sone  to  Jo"  Forthi*  karter  is  buikit  heirin 
prenteis  to  Jo"  Rodger  weivar  for  ye  sewin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs 
for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  y''  indento''  of  ye  dait  of  yir  pntis. 


Prenteis 
Jo*stoun. 


Octavo  Maij  1626. 

The  said  day  Dauid  Jo°stoun  sone  to  James  Jo"stoun  maissoun  indweller 
in  Glasgow  is  buikit  prenteis  to  Jo°  Bowie  skj'nner  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeiris 
and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  qlk  was  at  Candilmes  last  conforme 
to  y'  indento'  of  ye  dait  ye  xx  day  of  Februar  1626  zeiris. 


Prenteis 
Calmeroun. 


Decimo  nono  Maij  1626. 

The  said  day  James  Calmeroun  sone  to  vmq"^  Ro'  Calmeroun  merchand 
burges  of  Glasgow  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  w*  Jo"  Gillespie  tailzour  for  ye 
space  of  fyve  zeiris  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  y''  indento' 
of  j'C  dait  heirof. 


Act  aganes 

Michell 

Ranking. 


Admissioun 
Dowglas. 


2  of  Jimij  1626  zeirs. 

The  said  daj'  ye  deikin  conweinar  remanent  deikins  and  brejTein  of  his 
counsall  decernes  Michell  Ranking  to  be  dischargit  ye  hous  and  ye  gowne 
to  be  taine  frome  him  and  newir  to  haue  place  in  ony  tyme  heireftir  in  ye  said 
almoushous  for  abusing  ye  hous  diuers  tj'mes  and  dissobeying  ye  deikins  to 
cume  to  anser  to  ye  complaints  gewin  agans  him. 

xi  of  August  1626  zeiris. 

The  said  day  the  deikin  conveinar  and  breyrein  of  his  counsall  and 
remanent  deikins  hes  admittit  Jo"  Dowglas  maltman  to  be  in  ve  almoushous 
in  all  tyme  heireftir. 


i626J         RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  117 

The  said  day  William  Coittis  sone  to  Andro  Coittis  in  Spittell  is  buikit  Prenteis 
heirin  prenteis  to  serve  W"'  Coittis  cordoner  burges  of  Glasgow  in  ye  cordoner 
craft  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie 
conforme  to  his  indento"'  of  ye  dait  at  Glasgow  ye  thrid  of  August  1626  zeirs. 

xf  of  October  1626. 
The  said  day  William  Neilsoun  deikin  conweinar  being  conveinit  in  ye  Lytis  for 
almoushous  for  ellecting  thrie  honest  men  in  respect  he  was  baillie  himself  conveinar. 
to  be  wnlyte  q'"by  ye  proueist  and  bailleis  may  elect  ane  of  the  thrie  to  be 
deikin  conweinar  for  ye  zeir  to  cum  quha  be  pluralitie  of  voittis  hes  electit 
and  choissin  Niniane  Andersoune  W"^  Howie  and  Gawane  Neisbit  zog''  to  be 
wpone  lyte  q^'by  ye  proueist  and  bailleis  and  counsall  may  elect  ane  of  the  thrie 
to  be  pntit  be  W™  Andersoun  and  W"  Stalker. 

ye  xix  day  of  October  1626. 
The  said   day  Niniane  Andirsoun  deikin  conweinar  being  conweinit    in  Four  on  ye 
ye  New  Kirk  for  electing  four  men  to  be  wpone  ye  dean  of  gilds  counsall  quha  cokJJscU.^ 
be  pluralitie  of  voittis  electit  Johnne  Padie  Thomas  Morsoun  W™  Howie  Gawane 
Neisbit  zog''  to  be  wpone  ye  dean  of  gilds  counsall  for  ye  zeir  to  cum. 


And  sicklyk  ye  said  Niniane  being  conveinit  for  electing  of  his  counsall  Deikin 
electit  ye  persounes  following  viz  W™  Stalker  Gawane  Neisbit  elder  J01  counseU^ 
Wilsoun  James  Grahame  W""  Herriot  Johnne  Baird  James  Ritchie  Andro 
Mylne  Niniane  Gilhagie  James  Scheills  Patrik  W^tsoun  Mitchell  Spens  Jo" 
Gowane  William  Neilsoun  zog""  Johnne  Padie  Thomas  Morsoun  W™  Neilsoun 
elder  James  Ly'bodie  W™  Howie  W™  Andirsoun  Jo"  Crawfurd  Patrik  Colquhoun 
Ro'  Mwre  Gawan  Neisbit  zog""  M^^  Ar<^  Lyndsay  James  Mitchell  Thomas 
Fawsyd  elder  George  Mwre  James  Sympsoun  Jo"  Ferrier  James  Mwre  Manasses 
Lyll  Alex''  Colquhoun  Ro'  Patirsoun  Jo"  Crawfurd  Jo"  Boyd  Jo"  Andirsoun 
zoungest  Thomas  Scott  James  Colquhoun. 

Secund.  day  of  No'  1626. 

The  qlk  day  James  Rankein  sone  to  Thomas  Rankein  in  Balmoir  is  buikit  Prenteis 
heirin  prenteis  to  Waltir  Bowie  skyner  burges  of  Glasgow  for  ye  space  of  sewin 
zeiris  conforme  to  ane  indento^  maid  betuix  thame  of  ye  dait  ye  penult  day 
of  Apryle  1622  zeir  omittit  wnbuikit  q^'  now. 

Aucht  of  November  1626  zeiris. 

The  said  day  Johnne  Wilsoun  is  electit  collector  for  ye  zeir  to  cume  quha  wUsone 
hes  maid  faithe  as  vse  is  the  deikin  conweinar  being  alwayis  comptabill  for  '^°'^*'<^'°'' 
ye  intromissioun  conforme  to  ane  prio''  act. 

Niniane  Gilhagie  Gawane  Neisbit  elder  and  W™  Stalker  key  m^xs  for  ye  Box  m's. 
zeir  to  cum. 


ti8  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1626 

Deikin  Xhe   said  day   W"   Neilsoun   deikin   conweinar  remanent   deikinis  and 

hiscompt.  breyrein  of  his  counsall  being  conweinit  in  ye  almoushous  for  hairing  of  ye 
said  deikin  conweinar  his  compt  of  his  intromissioun  of  ye  puiris  geir  fra  ye 
tyme  he  was  electit  to  Mertimes  last  bypast  quha  chargit  himself  w'  ye  par- 
ticulars wnderwryttin. 

In  ye  first  ressaueit  frome  Niniane  Andirsoun  for  Forq'is  band  for  ye  anwal 
rent  of  fywe  hunderithe  fra  Witsoundaj'  1625  to  Witsounday  1627 

Ixvj  li  xii)  s.  iii)  d. 

Mair  for  ye  Ires  yairof        ......  iiij  1 

Mair  frome  Sir  Ro*  Hamiltoun  for  ye  anwal  of  fywe  hunderithe  punds  fra  Mer- 
times 1625  to  Mertimes  1626  .  .  .  .  .  1 11 

Frome  Charlis  IMovvat  for  ye  anwal  of  four  hunderithe  marks  fra  Mertimes 

1625  to  Mertimes  1626  .  .  .  xxvj  I1  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Frome  W™  Cunynghae  for  ye  anwall  of  ij<=  li  ye  said  last  termes  xx  ll 
Frome  ye  Laird  of  Ladielands  cau''is  for  ya  anwall  of  four  hunderithe  merks 

fra  Mertimes  1625  to  Mertimes  y^'eftir  .  xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Fra  Dauid  Pollock  for  ye  anwall  of  twa  hunderithe  merks  qlk  W™  Andirsoun 

ressaueit  ye  said  termes  .  .  .  xiij  ll  vj  s.  8d. 

Item  fra  Eliezar  HaiTiiltoun  for  ye  anwall  of  iiij^''  I1  ye  said  termes  viij  ll 

Item  fra  Johnne  Haihiltoun  for  ye  anwall  of  Ixxxv  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  ye  saids 

termes  .....  viij  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  Johne  Scott  for  ye  anwaU  of  v<=  ll  fra  Witsounday  1625  to  Witsounday 

1626  .......  in 

Q^of  he  restis  ane  terma  bygane. 

Item  fra  Johnne  Andirsoun  stamper  for  ye  anwall  of  jc  merks  fra  Witsounday 

1625  to  Witsounday  1627  zeiris  .  .  xiij  ll  vj  s.  8d. 
Item  fra  Malcum  Crawfurd  for  ya  anwall  of  fyve  hunderithe  merks  fra  Wit- 
sounday 1626  to  Witsounday  1627      ....  xxx  li 

Item  frome  Johna  Luiff  for  ya  an  wall  of  four  hunderithe  merks  fra  Witsounday 

1626  to  Witsounday  1627  .  .  .  xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  ya  deikins  qrtar  comptis  .....  jf'lvj  ll 
Qrof  W™  Calderwood  hes  deteinit  ix  ll  x  s.  Swa  restis  .  .  j'^xlvj  ll 
Item  ressaueit  of  ye  rentall  siluir  .  .  .  xxxv  li  xij  s.  vj  d. 
Item  for  ye  moirtclaithe  siluir  .  .  .  .  .  ix  li 
Item  frome  George  Mwre  .  .  .  .  v  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  from  W™  Howie  for  ye  burgessis       .             .             .       (  ) 

Suma  of  ye  charge    .  .  .  v^xxix  ll  xij  s.  vj  d. 

Discharge. 
Item  to  ye  puu-  men  of  ye  hospitall  .  .  .  j^^lx  ll 

Mair  to  yame  for  coillis  at  diuers  tymes     .  .  .  .  ix  ll 


1626]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  119 

Mair  for  strea  to  yair  bed  .....  -wj  ti 

Mair  for  twentie  ell  of  hardin  to  be  twa  pair  of  scheittis  and  to  lyne  y"'  claithes 

vj  ll 

Mair  for  making  of  ye  scheittis      .....  iiij  s. 

Item  for  aucht  ell  of  gray  claithe  to  be  W™  Bogill  and  W™  Calderwood  ane 
stand  of  claithes  and  cleuk  and  sax  ellis  of  blew  to  be  Michell  Rankain 
ane  gowne  and  ane  pair  of  hois  and  half  ane  ell  of  blew  to  be  W™  Bogill 
ane  pair  of  hois  .....        xxxiij  ti  xiiij  s. 

Mair  for  ye  making  of  yame  .....        xlviij  s. 

Item  for  fywe  ell  of  blew  claithe  and  ane  qrter  to  be  Jo°  Dowglas  ane  gowne 

X  ll  X  s. 

Mair  for  ye  making  of  it    .  .  .  .  .  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Mair  for  twa  laid  of  lyme  and  aucht  laid  of  sand  .  xxiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Mair  for  poynting  of  ye  hous  and  harling  of  ye  wall  .  iiij  li  x  s. 

Mair  for  four  fathwine  of  coird  and  ane  rung  to  ye  bell     .  .  vj  s. 

Item  to  W"  Calderwood  for  ane  pair  of  schone     .  .  .         xxiij  s. 

Item  to  Jo"  Stirling  quhen  he  was  seik      .  .  .  .  v  li 

Item  del3nwerit  to  Stein  Rowand  for  ye  bursour  conforme  to  ane  discharge 

Ixvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  to  George  Scheirilaw  his  sone  be  ane  warrand  xiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  for  ane  pair  of  Ires  aganes  Jo^^  Scott  and  his  caui'is 
Item  for  ye  chargeing  of  him  and  his  cau^is  to  Jo"  Ramsay 
To  M''  George  SempiU 
Mair  at  ye  delywerie  y^of  . 
To  Margarat  Clerk  be  ane  warrand 
To  Johnne  Mitchell  blind  man  be  ane  warrand 
To  Arthour  Fischer  be  ane  warrand 
To  James  Braidwood  of  fie 
To  Mathow  Ker  of  fie         . 
Item  for   ye   wrytting   owir   ye   fundatioun  of  ye  almoushous  xx  s. 

Suifia  of  ye  discharge  .  .  iiij<=xxiiij  li  j  s.  iiij  d. 

Charge  and  discharge  being  conferrit  ye  deikin  conweinar  restis 
awand      .....  j'=v  li  xj  s.  ij  d. 

Quhilk  sowme  of  j^v  li  xj  s.  ij  d.  the  said  W™  Neilsoun  deikin  conweinar 
pntlie  payit  and  exonerit  and  dischargit  the  said  W™  Neilsoun  of  his  haill 
intromissiouns  ye  last  zeir  be  yir  pntis  for  now  and  ewrr  except  ye  non  pay- 
mentis  of  ye  rentall. 

Lykas  Niniane  Andirsoun  ressaueit  sewin  hunderithe  merks  yat  was 
ressaueit  frome  Ritchart  Allane  w'  ye  sowme  of  j<=  fiftie  ae  pund  iij  s.  into  ye 
box  besyd  ye  bands  qlk  ye  said  Niniane  and  his  collecto''  may  be  comptabiU 
for  ye  nixt  zeir. 


X 

Ivu)  s. 

. 

xiiij  s. 

xvj  li 

xiij  s. 

iiij  d. 

iiij  li 

xvij  s. 

iiij  d. 
~ds. 
xls. 

vj  li 

xiij  s. 

iiij  d. 

xiij  li  vj 

s.  8d. 

iiij  ll 

I20 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1627 


Prenteis 
Boick. 


Prenteis 
Kink  aid. 


xij  of  J  a'  1627  zeiris. 
The  qlk  day  Ro'  Boick  sone  to  Johnne  Boick  quarriof  is  buikit  heirin 
prenteis  to  serue  James  Grahame  weiwar  burges  of  Glasgow  sewin  zeiris  as 
prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ane  indento''  of  ye  dait 
at  Glasgow  ye  x]  of  Ja''  1627  zeiris. 

The  said  day  Androw  Kinkaid  sone  to  Ro'  Cleir  indweller  in  Glasgow 
is  buikit  heirin  as  prenteis  to  serve  Ro'  Arthour  tailzour  burges  of  Glasgow 
sewin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ane  indentC 
of  ye  dait  at  Glasgow  ye  sec<J  of  De^  1626  zeiris. 

Ye  nynetein  day  of  Feb'  1627  zeirs. 

Prenteis  Cors.  The  qlk  day  Ar''  Cors  lau*full  sone  to  Johnne  Cors  miller  at  Partikmylne 

is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  serve  Johnne  Cors  tailzour  burges  of  Glasgow 
sewin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  as  ane  seruand  conforme  to  y""  indento'' 
of  ye  dait  at  Glasgow  ye  said  nynetein  day  of  Feb"'  1627  zeiris. 


Prenteis 
Zoung. 


Prenteis 
Hindirsoun. 


Prenteis 
Bonar. 


Prenteis  Park. 


Prenteis 
Lyndsay. 


xxviij  of  Merche  1627  zeiris. 
The  qlk  daj'  James  Zoung  lautfull  sone  to  wmq'^  Alex''  Zoung  weivar 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  serue  Mathow  Crawfurd  skynner  burges  of  Glasgow 
for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme 
to  ane  indento""  of  ye  dait  at  Glasgow  the  seweint  day  of  Merche  ye  zeir  of 
God  jajvjc  and  twentie  sewin  zeiris. 

xxviij  of  Junij  1627  zeiris. 
The  said  day  Androw  Hindirsoun  sone  to  Johnne  Hindirsoun  indweller 
in  Pitgoger  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  serue  James  Hindirsoun  tailzour  burges 
of  Glasgow  sewin  zeirs  as  prenteis  conforme  to  ane  indento''  of  ye    dait  ye 
xviij  day  of  Junij  1627  zeiris. 

X  of  August  1627  zeiris. 
The  qlk  day  Johnne  Bonar  sone  to  James  Bonar  indweller  in  Glasgow 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  serve  Ro*  Coicherane  fleschour  sewin    zeiris    as 
prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  cforme  to  ye  indento''  of  ye  dait  heirof. 

XV  of  August  1627  zeirs. 
The  qlk  day  Thomas  Park  sone  lau^'  to  James  Park  in  Boigtoune  is  buikit 
heirin  prenteis  to  Waltir  Bowie  skynner  for  sevin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs 
yeftir  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  qlk  was  at  Beltane  last  conforme  to  ye 
indento^  of  ye  dait  ye  nyneteine  day  of  Apryle  1627  zeirs. 

xxiiij  of  August  1627. 
The  qlk  day  Ro'  Lyndsay  sone  lau"  to  James  Lyndsay  in  Gourok  is  buikit 
heirin  prenteis  to  W"  Lindsay  hemirma  for  sevin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa 


1627]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  121 

zeirs  y''eftir  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  y^o  qlk  is  at  ye  dait  y''of  cforme  to 
y''  indento"'  of  ye  dait  of  yir  pntis. 

X  of  Odohir  1627. 
The  qlk  day  Caes  Sim  sone  lau'full  to  Jo°  Sim  in  Newlands  is    buikit  Prenteis  Sim. 
prenteis  and  servand  to  Jo"  Craufurd  maltman  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeirs  fra 
his  entrie  qlk  was  and  began  at  Witsonday  last  bypast  cforme  to  y''  indento'' 
of  ye  dait  ye  twentie  aucht  day  of  Merche  1627  zeirs. 

The  said  day  Allane  Gilmour  sone  lau'full  to  Jo"  Gilmour  in  Ovirdarnelie  Prenteis 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  George  Locheid  couper  burges  of  Glasgow  for  sevin 
zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  yeftir  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  yi'to  qlk 
was  wpon  the  first  day  of  Merche  1623  cforme  to  y''  indento""  of  ye  dait  ye 
twentie  twa  day  of  Februar  1623  zeirs. 

The  said  day  ye  deikin  conweinar  being  conweinit  in  ye  almoushous  for  Lytis  for 
ye  electioun  of  twa  honest  men  w*  himself  to  be  presentit  to  ye  proueist  bailleis  conveinar. 
and  counsall  q'by  yai  may  elect  and  chuis  ane  of  ye  thrie  to  be  electit  deikin 
conweinar  for  ye  zeLr  to  cum  quhlk  being  voitit  ye  said  deikin  conweinar  w' 
ye  remanent  deikins  and  brejTcin  of  his  counsall  electit  and  chuis  w*  ye  said 
deikin  conweinar  Gawane  Neisbit  zog^  and  W™  Howie  to  be  presentit  to  ye 
proueist  bailzeis  and  counsell  q''by  yai  may  elect  ane  of  the  thrie  to  be  deikin 
conweinar  for  ye  zeir  to  cum  and  hes  conteinowit  Niniane  Andirsoun  deikin 
conweinar  for  ye  zeir  to  cum. 

xj  of  October  1627. 
The  said  day  Niniane  Andirsoun  deikin  conweinar  being  conweinit  in  ye  Four  on  ye 
New  Kirk  w'  ye  deikins  and  breyrein  of  his  counsall  for  electing  of  fo'  honest  counsaiif 
men  to  be  on  ye  dean  of  gilds  counsall  quho  be  pluralitie  of  voittis  electit  Jo" 
Padie  Thomas  Morsoun  W™  Howie  and  Jo"  Andirsoun  zog""  deikin  to  be  on 
ye  said  dean  of  gUds  counsall. 

23  of  October  1627. 

The  said  day  Niniane  Andirsoun  deikin  conweinar  Thomas  Morsoun  .\ganesbon- 
Johnne  Padie  W™  Howie  Androw  Mylne  and  W™  Andirsoun  being  conweinit 
in  ye  New  Kirk  for  ye  heiring  of  ane  complaint  gewin  in  be  Thomas  Nesmyt 
deikin  of  ye  bonnetmakeris  and  Patrik  Brounsyd  aganes  W""  Gowane  and  Jo" 
Smythe  and  remanent  breyrein  of  y""  craft  anent  ye  haill  breyrein  y^of  dis- 
chargeing  Patrik  Brounsyd  walking  w*  ye  rest  for  ye  alledgit  feying  of  Androw 
Scheillis  contrair  ye  actis  of  y""  craft  and  sicklyk  ye  said  W™  Gowane  and 
Johnne  Smythe  for  ye  abusing  ye  said  Thomas  Nesmythe  in  Mareoun  Mure 
hir  hous  and  wy^  questiounes  debatabill  amangis  ye  saidis  pteis  quhilk  com- 
plaint and  debatabill  materis  amangis  ye  said  breyrein  being  hard  befoir  ye 
said  deikin  conweinar  and  breyrein   foirsaid  the  said  Johnne  Smythe  W™ 


netmakeris. 


122  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1627 

Gowane  and  Mitschell  Spens  for  yaselfis  and  for  ye  haill  brey'  submittit 
yaselfis  to  ye  said  deikin  conweinar  and  foirsaid  breyrein  y''  judgement  and 
q'evvir  ye  saidis  judgis  sould  do  in  ye  said  mater  yat  yai  sould  stand  and  abyd 
y''at  quhilk  complaint  being  referrit  to  ye  saids  judgis  in  manir  foirsaid  the 
saidis  judgis  all  in  ae  voce  decernes  ye  said  Androw  Scheillis  to  serue  Thomas 
Nesmythe  and  Patrik  Brownsyd  conform  to  ye  said  Andro  his  band  grantit 
to  ya  y''wpone  and  sicklyk  decernes  ye  haill  brey''  to  keip  ny'bourheid  in 
walking  w*  ye  said  deikin  and  Patrik  Brounsyd  wndir  ye  paine  of  ten  pund 
toties  quoties  and  sickh'k  decernes  ye  haill  brey''  to  obej'  ye  said  deikin  and 
keip  his  meitingis  at  all  tymes  q'sumewir  wndir  ye  lyk  paine  and  also  decernes 
ye  said  W"  Gowane  and  Jo"  Smythe  ewerie  ane  of  ya  to  pay  fywe  punds  to 
ye  Weill  of  ye  puir  of  ye  hospitall  for  y'^  abusing  ye  said  deikin  in  Mareoun 
Mure  hir  hous  and  decernes  Mitschell  Spens  to  pay  to  ye  said  puir  fywe  punds 
for  his  wnrewrant  speitchis  in  ye  New  Kirk  befoir  ye  said  deikin  conweinar 
and  breyrein  foirsaid  and  last  of  all  yai  decerne  ye  foirsaid  psones  to  mak  ye 
said  deikin  ane  mendis  for  ye  fault  done  be  ya  to  him  be  sicht  of  ye  said  deikin 
conweinar  and  judgis  foirsaid. 

26  of  October  1627  zeiris. 

Deikin  The  qlk  day  Niniane  Andirsoun  deikin  conweinar  remanent  deikins  and 

coMnseii.  '  certane  breyrein  of  his  counsall  being  conweinit  for  ye  electing  of  ane  new 
counsall  for  ye  zeir  to  cume  electit  and  chuis  ye  psones  following  Jo^"  Duncane 
Johnne  Mwre  Jo°  Andirsoun  James  Winzett  James  Robesoun  James 
Elphingstoun  Johnne  Boyd  James  Padie  Androw  Mylne  Niniane  Gilhagie 
Ro'  Pollock  Patrik  Watsoun  Thomas  Nesmythe  Johnne  Govane  W""  Neilsoun, 
baillie,  Thomas  Morsoun  Jo"  Padie  Waltir  Dowglas  W™  Neilsoun  elder  W™ 
Stalker  Gawane  Neisbit  elder  Gawane  Neisbit  zog"'  Johnne  Wilsoun  cordoner 
W™  Howie  W™  Andirsoun  Jo"  Crawfurd  Patrik  Colquhoun  M^"  Ar^  Lyndsay 
Thomas  Fawsyde  elder  George  Mwre  James  Sympsoun  Manasses  Lyill  Jo" 
Luif  Jo"  Ferrier  Thomas  Scott  Alex''  Colquhoun  Ro'  Patersoun  Jo"  Andirsoun 
zoungest  Thomas  Gray  James  Mitschell  Ritchart  Allane  Jo"  Baird  Johnne 
Hall  chirurgioun. 

Compt  The  said  day  Niniane  Andirsoun  deikin  conweinar  and  Johnne  Wilsoun 

his  collector  being  conveinit  w'  ye  remanent  deikins  and  breyrein  of  his 
counsall  foirsaid  for  heiring  and  making  compt  of  y''  intromissiounes  of  ye 
pure  geir  fra  y''  electioun  to  ye  terme  of  Mertimes  1627  quha  chargit  yaselfis 
w*  ye  particularis  wndirwryttin. 

Item  fra  Eliezar  Hamiltoun  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  four  scoir  of  punds  fra  Mer- 
times 1626  to  Mertimes  yt'eftir  .....  viij  t 
Item  fra  David  Pollock  of  Lie  for  ye  anwall  of  ij"^  marks  ye  said  zeir 

xiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 


1627]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  123 

Item  frome  Charlis  Mowat  for  the  anwall  of  four  hunderithe  merkis  ye  said 

zeir  .....  .xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  ye  Laird  of  Siluirtounhill  for  ye  anwall  of  fyve  hunderithe  pund  ye 

said  zeir  .  .  .  .  .  .  •  1  1i 

Item  fra  ye  said  Eliezar  Hamiltoun  as  cau^  for  Jo"  Haiiiiltoun  at  ye  leist  ye 

said  Jo°  himself  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  four  scoir  vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  ye  said 

zeir     ......  viij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  frome  Johnne  Scott  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  fywe  hunderithe  pund  fra  Wit- 

sounday  1626  to  Witsounday  1627      •  •  •  •  ^  ^ 

Item  fra  William  Cunyngha  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  !]<=  I1  fra  Mertimes  1626  to 

Mertimes  1627  .  .  .  .  .  .  xx  ll 

Item  ressaueit  from  Johnne  Andirsoun  deikin  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  p  merks 

fra  Witsounday  1627  to  Witsounday  1628       .  .  .  vj  ll 

Item    fra  Malcum  Crawfurd  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  iij  ''xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d.  ye  said 

terme  of  Witsounday  1627  to  Witsounday  1628  .  .  xxx  ll 

Item  frome  Johnne  Luif  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  four  hunderithe  merks  fra  Wit- 
sounday 1627  to  Witsounday  1628      ....        .xxiiij  ll 
Item  frome  Johnne  Forquhar  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  iii'^xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d.  fra 

Witsounday  1627  to  Witsounday  1628  .  xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  frome  Mareoun  Mwre  relict  of  wmqle  Dauid  Scheirar  of  legacie  left  be 

him  to  ye  puir  ......  Ixvj  ll 

Item  for  ye  mortclaithe      ......    xix  li  x  s. 

Item  fra  ye  burgessis  .....  xxxvj  li  ij  s. 

Item  of  rentall  siluir  .  .  .  .  .  xl  li  ij  s. 

Item  in  ye  box  conforme  to  ye  last  compt  .  .  .       j^xvij  li 

Item  mair  of  qrter  comptis  .....         j^lvj  li 

Item  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  Gawane  Neisbit  his  fywe  hunderithe  merks  fra 

Mertimes  1626  to  Mertimes  1627  ....  xlv  ll 

Item  ressaueit  fra  ye  Laird  of  Ladielands  for  ye  anwall  of  four  hunderithe 

merk  ye  said  zeir         ....  xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Suiha  of  ye  charge    .  .  .       vij^^lxxviij  ll  iij  s.  iiij  d. 

Discharge. 

Item  to  ye  puir  for  y^  qrter  pay's               .              .  .  .           j=lx  li 

Item  to  Patrik  Leinzeis  be  ane  warrand     .              .  .  .             xx  s. 

Item  to  ane  smythe  in  Aer  be  ane  warrand            .  .  .             xx  s. 

Item  at  ye  lending  of  Gawane  Neisbits  siluir          .  .  .   ij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  W™  Calderwood  to  buy  ane  pair  of  schone  .  .        xxiiij  s. 

Item  to  ye  colledge  for  y'  bursour               .              .                Ixvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  to  M''  George  Sempill  for  ye  anwall  of  his  money      .  Ixvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Mair  in  W°>  Andirsouns  hous  for  his  denner           .  .  Iiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  W™  Witherspone  be  ane  warrand              .  .  .             xl  s. 


124 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1627 


Item  to  Jo"  Calder  be  ane  warrand  .  .  .  .  x  li 

Item  for  claithe  to  Sjanont  Baird  to  be  ane  govvne  .       xij  li  vij  s.  vj  d. 

Item  to  Gawane  Neisbit  zog^  for  sax  ellis  ane  qrter  of  ane  gray  claithe  to  be 

claithes  to  ye  puir       .  .  .  .  .       x  li  viij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  sax  ells  of  hardin  to  lyne  ye  claithes        .  .  .        xlviij  s. 

Item  to  Jo°  M'^Kilvane  be  ane  warrand     .  .  .      vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  W™  Calderwood  be  ane  warrand  .  .  .  iij  ll  vj  s.  8d. 

Item  for  sax  qrteris  of  gray  claithe  to  be  thrie  pair  of  hois  .  1  s. 

Mair  at  ye  ressait  of  Mareoun  Mwres  siluir  .  .  .         xviij  s. 

Item  to  George  Scheirilawis  sone  conforme  to  ane  warrand  xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  to  Johnne  Mitschell  tailzour  for  ye  making  of  twa  stand  of  claithes  ane 

gowne  and  four  pair  of  hois  being  lynit  .  .  .         xliiij  s. 

Item  to  James  Braidwood  for  his  fie  .  .  .    xiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  Jo°  Scott  for  sax  laids  of  peitts  to  ye  puir  .  .  xx  s. 

Mair  to  ya  for  threttie  sax  laids  of  coillis  .  .  .  ix  li  j  s.  vj  d. 

Item  gewin  out  for  ye  mending  of  Symont  Bairds  claithes  .  viij  s. 

Mair  wpone  ye  22  day  of  October  1627  ^'^^  ^^^^  ^^^'^  o^  coillis  to  ye  puir  x  s. 
Item  to  ye  said  Gawane  Neisbit  zog"'  for  ane  qrter  half  qrter  of  claithe  to  mak 

out  ye  puiris  hois        .  .  .  .  .  .  xij  s. 


SuiTia  of  ye  discharge 


iiji^lxxxx  li  viij  s. 


Charge   and   discharge   being   conferrit   restis 

iij<=iiijx'^viij  li  iij  s.  hij  d. 


Deikin 

conveinars 

discharge. 


Quhilk  sowme  restand  awand  be  ye  said  deikin  conweinar  and  his  said 
coUecto"'  to  ye  said  puir  the  said  Johnne  Wilsoun  collecto''  has  imput  in  ye 
said  puiris  geir  in  ye  box  to  ye  pnt  deikin  conweinar  and  his  pnt  collector 
to  be  comptabill  ye  nixt  zeir  and  y'"foir  dischargis  ye  said  deikin  conweinar  and 
Jo°  Wilsoun  collecto''  foirsaid  of  y"^  intromissiounes  w'  ye  puiris  geir  ye  said 
zeir  for  now  and  ewir. 


Prenteis 
Swan. 


Decimo    Sexto    No'is    1627. 

The  qlk  day  W™  Swane  servito''  to  Andro  Mylne  pnt  deikin  of  the 
chinirgianes  of  Glasgow  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  ye  sd  Andro  for  ye  space 
of  sevin  zeirs  fra  his  entrie  yto  qlk  is  of  ye  dait  of  ye  sd  indento''  qlk  is  of  ye 
dait  ye  first  day  of  No'  jajvjc  twentie  sevin  zeirs. 


Prenteis 
Biggart. 


xix  of  No'  1627  zeiris. 

The  qlk  day  James  Biggart  sone  to  Thomas  Biggart  burges  in  Dunbartane 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  serve  Andro  Spreule  weiwar  burges  in  Glasgow 
sewin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ane  indento' 
maid  betuix  yame  of  ye  dait  ye  said  nynetein  day  of  No''  1627. 


i628]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  125 

The  said  day  James  Patersoun  sone  to  Jo"  Patersoun  in  Baglas  is  buikit  Prenteis 
heirin  to  serve  Jo°  Kirlie  weiwar  burges  of  Glasgow  as  prenteis  for  ye  space 
of  sewin  zeiris  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ane  indento"'  of  ye 
dait  of  yir  pntis. 

xxj  day  of  Nonember  1627. 

The  qlk  day  Thomas    Scott  sone  to  Thomas  Scott  in  Schettilstoun  is  Prenteis  Scott. 
buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  serue  Ar^  Glen  weiwar  burges  of  Glasgow  sewin  zeiris 
as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  of  ye  dait  at  Glasgow  ye  thrid  of 
Nor  i525  zeiris. 

Qwinto  Feb'''  1628. 

The  said  day  W"'  Thomesoune  sone  to  vmq'^  W™  Thomesoun  in  Auchin-  Prenteis 
airne  is  buikit  prenteis  to  Andro  Gray  cordoner  for  ye  space  of  fyve  zeirs  as      °™<=soun. 
prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  5H;o  qlk  is  of  ye  dait  of  ye 
sd  indento''  as  ye  samyne  daitit  at  Glasgow  ye  xxix  of  Octobir  1624  zeirs  in 
ye  self  beirs. 

xiii  of  Februar  1628  zeiris. 

The  qlk  day  ye  deikin  conweinar  remanent  deikinis  and  breyrein  of  his  Act  anent  ye 
counsall  all  in  ae  voice  hes  statute  and  ordeaneit  yat  q'sumewir  new  deikin  heidis'fOT° 
conweinar  or  deikin  yat  happinis  to  be  ane  new  incumir  sail  pay  for  ye  wasching  armour. 
of  his  heid  audit  punds  money  to  by  armour  withe  as  ye  deikin  conweinar 
and  remanent  deikins  yinks  expediet  and  for  experence   y^of   Jo°  Andirsoun 
deikin  of  ye  cordoneris  Jo°  Mwre  deikin  of  ye  tailzouris  Ro'  Pollock  deikin 
of  ye  cowpers  James  Winzett  deikin  of  ye  weiwaris  and  Thomas  Nesmythe 
deikin  of  ye  bonnetmakeris  hes  bocht  fyue  musketts  to  be  placit  in  ye  almous- 
hous  to  be  furthecumand  to  ye  weill  of  ewerie  ane  of  y^  craftis  to  muster  and 
wyi'wayis  to  ye  puir. 

The  said  day  anent  ye  petitioune  gevin  in  be  James  Ewing  sone  to  George  Prenteis 
Ewing  in  Stirling  makand  mentioune  y'  q''  ye  sd  James  be  indento''  of  ye  dait,  ^'"'"S- 
at  Glasgow  ye  twentie  day  of  August  jajvic  twentie  thrie  zeirs,  was  bund  and 
obleist  to  serve  George  Patsone  weivar  burges  of  Glasgow  for  ye  space  of  sevin 
zeiris  as  prenteis  and  tua  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  as  ye  sd  indentour  in  ye  self 
proportis  zit  notyeles  ye  sd  James  hes  servit  ye  sd  George  four  zeirs  space  of 
ye  sd  indento''  leillelie  and  trewlie  ay  and  qi^  ye  sd  George  divertit  himself  fra 
work  and  took  him  to  ye  kingis  service  at  ye  requeist  of  ye  toune  of  Glasgow 
and  y^by  ye  sd  George  neglectit  to  bulk  him  heirin  cforme  to  ye  Ire  of  gildrie 
q'by  he  may  have  ye  benefite  of  ane  burges  qlk  au*  to  be  seing  ye  sd  James 
is  willing  to  serve  Ar"*  Patsone  weivar  father  to  ye  sd  George  ye  remanent 
zeirs  conteinit  in  ye  sd  indento"'  and  y''foir  besoght  ye  deikin  conveinar  and 
remanet  deikines  and  breithreine  of  his  counsall  to  bulk  him  heirin  conforme 


126 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1628 


to  his  indentor  and  Ire  of  gildrie  as  ye  petitioune  gevin  in  y'anent  at  lenth 
beirs  qlk  petitioune  being  hard  and  qualifiet  to  ye  sd  deikin  conveinar  remanent 
deikines  and  breithrein  of  his  counsall  they  ordanit  ye  sd  James  to  be  buikit 
heirin  to  serve  ye  said  Ar**  Patsone  ye  remanent  zeiris  conteinit  in  ye  sd  indento'' 
q^'by  ye  sd  James  may  attein  to  ye  libertie  of  ane  burges  if  he  trewlie  serve. 

Duodecimo  Mtij.  1628. 

Prenteis  Bull.  The  qlk  day  Mairtene  Bull  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  Robert    Snype 

couper  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeiris  as  prenteis  fra  his  entrie  y''to  qlk  was  at  ye 
first  of  Marche  eftir  ye  dait  of  ye  sd  indento""  qlk  is  of  ye  dait  ye  nynt  day  of 
Februar  1625  ^s  ye  samyne  in  ye  self  beirs. 

Decimo  Septimo  Mtij  1628. 

Prenteis  Rid.  The  said  day  Jo"  Rid  sone  to  Mathow  Rid  weiwar  in  Gorballs  is  buikit 

heirin  prenteis  to  Ar<i  Glen  weiwar  burges  of  Glasgow  for  ye  space  of  aucht 
zeirs  as  prenteis  and  ane  zeir  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  y^'to  conforme  to 
y'  indento"'  qlk  is  baithe  of  ye  dait  of  yir  pntis  as  ye  samyne  in  ye  self  beirs. 

Vigesimo  quarto  Mtij  1628. 

Prenteis  Muir.  The  qlk  day  James  Muir  sone  to  vmqi«  Ro*  Muir  in  Bischopbrigis  is  buikit 

heirin  prenteis  to  James  Wode  cordoner  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeiris  as  prenteis 
and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  yi'to  conforme  to  y''  indento''  qlkis 
ar  bay'  of  ye  dait  of  yir  pntis  as  ye  indento''  set  doune  betuix  y'"  at  lenth  beirs. 


Prenteis 
.Mkein. 


Prenteis  Gray. 


Prenteis 
Selkrig. 


xviij  of  Apryle  1628. 

The  qlk  day  Androw  Aikein  sone  to  wmq'^  W"^  Aikein  at  Prowand  Mylne 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  serve  Androw  Pettigrew  cowper  burges  of  Glasgow 
sewin  zeiris  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ane  indento^  of  ye  dait 
at  Glasgow  ye  tent  of  Merche  jaivjc  and  twentie  aucht  zeiris. 

xix  day  of  Maij  1628. 

The  qlk  day  James  Gray  sone  to  James  Gray  in  Litil  Da%'ie  is  buikit 
heirin  prenteis  to  serue  Patrik  Bar  skynner  burges  of  Glasgow  for  ye  space  of 
sewin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  qlk  was 
and  begane  at  Witsounday  1627  conforme  to  ane  indento''  of  ye  dait  of  yir 
pntis. 

XX  June  1628. 

The  qlk  day  Johne  Selkrig  sone  to  Issobel  Maxuell  induellar  in  Glasgow 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  serve  Ar<^  Howie  litster  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeirs 
as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  yairto  qlk  was  and 
began  at  ye  dait  of  ye  sd  indento'  as  ye  samy  of  ye  dait  ye  thrid  of  Apryle 
1628  zeirs  beirs. 


i628]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  127 

The  said  day  Thomas  Gray  sone  to  Jo°  Gray  in  Bedlay  Mylne  is  buikit  Prcnteis  Gray, 
heirin  prenteis  to  W™  Finlay  cordoner  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeirs  as  prcnteis 
and  tua  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  qlk  was  at  {  )  conforme 

to  ane  indento''  maid  betwix  yame  of  ye  dait  ye  xxv  day  of  Mche  1628. 

xvj  day  of  Julij  1628. 
The  said  day  Waltir  Crawfurd  sone  lautfull  to  wmqle  Johnne  Crawfurd  in  Prenteis 

-...,.,.',..  .  -    ,  „  •,  ,  Craufurde. 

Craigis  IS  bmkit  heirm  prenteis  to  serve  Johnne  Or  zounger  tailzour  burges 
of  Glasgow  sewin  zeiris  compleit  conforme  to  ane  indento"'  of  ye  dait,  at  Glasgow 
ye  saxtein  day  of  Januar  iajvjc  and  twentie  four  zeiris. 

xxij  Julij  1628. 

The  qlk  day  Mathow  Thomesone  sone  to  vmq'^  W""  Thomesone  portionar  Prenteis 
of  Auchinairne  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  James  Imbrie  flescho'  for  ye  space 
of  sevin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  y^eftir  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to 
ane  indento''  maid  betuix  y™  of  ye  dait  of  yir  pntis  quhais  entrie  was  and 
began  at  ye  fourt  of  Maij  1625  zeirs  as  ye  indento'  maid  betuix  y™  in  ye  self 
at  lenth  proports. 

Octauo  Ociobris  1628. 

The  qlk  day  Niniane  Andirsoun  deikin  conweinar  being  conweinit  w'  ye  Admissioun 
deikins  auld  and  new  and  remanent  breyrein  of  his  counsall  in  ye  hospitall  of  '^^  ^°"°" 
ye  craftis  for  electing  and  chuising  tlirie  men  to  be  wpone  lyte  to  be  pntit  to 
ye  proueist  bailleis  and  counsall  q''by  yai  may  elect  and  chuis  ane  of  the  thrie 
to  be  deikin  conweinar  for  ye  zeir  to  cume  and  yat  in  respect  ye  said  Niniane 
Andirsoun  hes  bein  twa  zeir  deikin  conweinar  and  y''by  can  not  be  lytit  con- 
forme to  ye  Ire  of  gildrie  thairfoir  ye  said  deikin  conweinar  and  breyrein 
foirsaid  electit  and  chuis  W™  Neilsoun  laitt  baillie  Gawane  Neisbit  zoung' 
and  Jo°  Andirsoun  callit  bailleis  Jone  to  be  voittit  be  ye  said  proueist  bailleis 
and  counsall  q''by  ane  of  ye  thrie  may  be  electit  deikin  conweinar  for  ye  zeir 
to  cume  and  ordaines  Niniane  Gilhagie  and  Patrik  Watsoun  to  pnt  ye  samyn 
to  ye  effect  foirsaid  conforme  to  ye  qlk  ye  said  proueist  bailleis  and  counsall 
hes  electit  W"  Neilsoun  deikin  conweinar  for  ye  zeir  to  cume. 

The  said  day  William  Neilsoun  being  admittit  deikin  conweinar  and  Deikin 
being  conweinit  w'  certane  of  his  counsall  electit  and  cuis  ye  persounes  wnder-  counsSl^^ 
wryttin  to  be  wpone  his  counsall  for  ye  zeir  to  cume  viz  Gabriell  Smythe  Jo" 
Wilsoun  Ro*  Horner  Manasses  Lyill  James  Robesoun  Ro'  Bell  Niniane  Gilhagie 
Jo"  Falconer  Ro'  Pollock  Jo°  Boyd  Ro'  Watsoun  Androw  Mylne  Mitschell 
Spens  Jo°  Gowane  Johnne  Padie  Thomas  Morsoun  Waltir  Dowglas  Niniane 
Andirsoun  W™  Neilsoun  elder  Johnne  Andirsoun  elder  Gawane  Neisbit  elder 
Johnne  Mwre  Gawane  Neisbit  zoung"'  Jo°  Crawfurd  W™  Andirsoun  Thomas 
Fawsyd  elder   Willia   Howie   Jo"   Andirsoun   zoung'    George    Mwre     James 


128  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1628 

Simpson  Jo"  Luiff  Ro*  Patersone  James  Mitschell  Ritchart  Allane  Patrik 
Colquhoun  Thomas  Gray  Patrik  Watsoun  James  Padie  Willia  Stalker  James 
Colquhoun  M'  Ar'*  Lyndsay  Alex^  Colquhoun  James  Flemyng  Thomas 
Nesmythe  maltma  James  Withirspone  Johnne  Thomesoun  Johnne  M^Kewin 
litstar  Thomas  Scott  Jo°  Ferrier  Thomas  Achesoun  Ai<^  Howie. 

Nono  Octobris  1628. 

CounsaUouris  The  said  day  William  Neilsoun  deikin  conweinar  being  conweinit  w*  ye 

of|ad^^'"  deikins  and  counsall  abouewryttin  in  ye  tolbuithe  of  Glasgow  for  electing 
four  honest  men  to  be  wpone  ye  dein  of  gildis  counsall  quho  be  pluralitie  of 
voittis  electit  and  chuis  Waltir  Dowglas  W^^  Howie  Gawane  Neisbit  zog"" 
and  Jo°  Andirsoun  zog''  to  be  wpone  ye  said  dein  of  gilds  counsall  for  ye  zeir 
to  cume  conforme  to  ye  Ire  of  gildrie. 

Quinto  No^is  1628. 

The  qlk  day  Thomas  Gray  is  electit  collecto''  for  ye  zeir  to  cume  quho 
hes  maid  faithe  as  vse  is. 

Admissioun.  The  said  day  Nicoll  Scott  is  admittit  to  [be]  in  ye  almoushous  in  wmqle 

Patrik  Leinzeis  place. 

Item  ye  keyis  is  gewin  to  Niniane  Gilhagie  Jo°  Wilsoun  and  Ro'  Horner. 

xij  day  of  November  1628. 

The  qlk  day  compeirit  Niniane  Andirsoun  and  Gawane  Neisbit  zog'  his 
collecto''  befoir  ye  deikins  and  remanent  breyrein  of  his  counsall  for  heiring 
of  y""  compt  of  ye  intromissioun  w'  ye  craftis  hospitall  geir  fra  y'  electioun 
to  ye  day  of  yis  pnt  compt  quho  chargit  yamselfis  w*  ye  particularis  wndir- 
wryttin. 

In  ye  first  conteinit  in  ye  box  qlk  restit  ye  last  compt     iijclxxxvii]  %  ix  s.  8d. 
Mair  fra  ye  deikinis  ......  j'^lvj  li 

Mair  fra  Siluirtounhill  for  ye  anwall  of  his  money  fra  Mertimes  1627  to  Mer- 
times  1628       .  .  .  .  .  •  •  1  ll 

Mair  fra  Dauid  Pollock  for  ij"^  merks  fra  Mertimes  1627  to  Witsounday  1628 

V]  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Mair  fra  Charlis  Mowat  for  iiijc  merks  fra  Mertimes  1627  to  Mertimes  1628 

xxv]  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Mair  fra  Ladilandis  iiijc  merks  fra  Mertimes  1627  to  Mertimes  1628 

xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Mair  for  Gawane  Neisbittis  v^  punds  fra  Mertimes  1627  to  Mertimes  1628 

xlvt 

Item  fra  Eliezar  Hamiltoun  for  his  money  conforme  twa  bands  fra  Mertimes 

1627  to  Mertimes  1628  .  .  .  xvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 


i628]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  129 

Item  fra  James  Hoggiszaird  of  legacie  left  be  his  wmqle  fay'         .  xl  1i 

Item   fra  Malcum  Crawfurd  for  fywe  hunderithe  marks  fra  Mertimes  1627 

to  Mertimes  1628         ......  xxx  i 

Item  fra  Jon  Menteithes  wyf  left  in  legacie  be  him  .  .  xx  li 

Item  fra  Johnne  Andirsoun  for  ]=  merkis  fra  Witsounday  1628  to  Witsounday 

1629  •  •  •  •  ■  •  •  vj  H 

Item  fra  Johnne  Luif  for   iiijc  merkis  fra  Witsounday  1628  to  Witsounday 

1629  .......        xxiiij  ll 

Item  fra  W^i  Cruix  for  his  siluir  fra  Witsounday  1628  to  Mertimes  1628  x  li 
Mair  fra  W'^^  Cunynghame  for  ye  anwall  of  iijc  merks  fra  Mertimes  1627  to 

Mertimes  1628  .  .  .  .  .  .  xx  ll 

Item  ye  burges  siluir  .....    Ixix  li  xj  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  ye  mortclaithe  siluir  .  .  .  .  ix  li  xviij  s. 

Item  ye  rentall  siluir  .....  xlij  ^  iiij  s. 

Item  gewin  be  ye  litstaris  and  walkeris  of  y^  qrter  comptis  vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  ressaueit  frome  ye  said  Eliezar  and  Jo"  Hamiltounes  ye  sowme  conteinit 

in  yf  twa  sewerall  bandis  extending  to  .  i<=lxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  ressaueit  of  ye  proffeit  of  ye  daillis    .  .  vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  farder  in  ye  box        ....  xxxj  li  xiij  s.  ij  d. 

Suma  of  ye  charge     .  .  jaJjclxxxxix  li  ix  s.  iiij  d. 

Discharge. 

In  the  first  of  ye  money  yat  was  [put]  into  ye  box  conteinit  in  ye  charge  gewin 
to  Jo°  Reid  zog''  wricht  and  his  cau''  be  y^  band.         .  .  i<^\% 


ij'=li 

xxxviij  ll 

j<^lxli 

XX  s. 

xjt 

xviij  s. 


Mair  to  W""  Cruiks  his  sone  and  y'  caul's  be  ane  wyf  band 

Mair  into  ye  box  wngewin  out        .... 

Mair  to  ye  puir  men  for  y''  wagis  .... 

To  Patrik  Leinzeis  be  ane  warrand 

To  W™  Bogill  for  ane  gowne  .... 

Mair  for  ye  making  of  it  and  ane  qrter  of  hardin  to  ye  neck  yairo 

Mair  to  him  for  half  ane  ell  of  gray  to  be  hois  and  making  yairof  x.x  s. 

Mair  to  Patrik  Leinzies  for  thrie  ell  of  gray  claithe  at  xxxij  s.  ye  elle  inde 

iiij  li  xvj  s. 
Mair  at  ye  helping  to  mak  yame    .....  viij  s. 

Mair  gewin  to  Bartie  Mwre  aucht  ell  bleitchit  claithe  to  be  ane  pair  of  scheittis 

Ivij  s. 
To  W™  Calderwood  for  ane  pair  of  schone  .  .  xxvj  s.  viij  d. 

Mair  for  ane  cowering  to  Symon  Baird  w'  ane  qrter  of  hardin  to  hem  ye  samyn 

Is. 

Mair  for  ane  pair  of  scheittis  to  Lawrie  Schaw       .  .  .  hj  li 

To  Stein  Rowane  for  M''  Jo"  Howiesounes  burseour  fra  Mertimes   1627  to 

Mertimes  1628  ....  Ixvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 


Ixv)  H 

xiij 

s.  iiij  d. 

vir 

iii 

t  vj  s. 

XX  s. 

xls. 

xvj  li 

xijs. 

xxvj  ll 

xiij 

s.  iiij  d. 

^'] 

li  xj  d. 

k  of  it 

xviij  s. 

130  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1628 

To  M""  George  Sempill  for  his  zeiris  anwall 

Mair  spent  at  twa  sevverall  tymes  at  ye  ressait  of  ye  silvir 

To  James  Withirspone  hamerma  wpone  ane  warrand 

To  Michell  Rankein  wpone  ane  warrand     . 

Mair  viij  ell  of  gray  claithe  price  of  ye  ell  xl  s.     inde 

Mair  for  twa  ell  hardin  to  outred  ya 

Mair  to  Alex^  Cauldwall  for  his  twa  grund  anwallis 

Mair  that  day  for  ane  gowne  to  Bartie  Mure 

Mair  for  ye  making  of  it  and  ane  qrter  of  hardin  to  ye  neck  of  it 

Mair  for  sax  vnce  v  drap  wecht  of  silk  to  be  ane  freinze  to  ye  meikil  mort- 

claithe  ye  vnce  xxv  s.  inde      ....  vij  li  xv  s. 

Mair  for  ye  weiving  of  it    .  .  .  .  .  .  xvj  s. 

Mair  for  ye  dressing  of  ye  mortclaithe  and  W'illia  Calderwoodis  claithes  making 

xxxvj  s. 
Mair  for  ane  riddill  to  ye  almoushous         .  .  .  .  vj  s. 

To  Symont  Baird  for  dressing  of  ye  muskatts 

To  Jo"  Bryssoun  for  ye  chargeing  of  Alex"'  Vallance 

To  W""  Calderwood  for  ane  pair  of  schoone 

To  James  Braidwood  for  his  fie      . 

Mair  for  coillis  and  peittis  furneist  to  ye  hous 

To  Gabriell  Smythe  for  twa  staine  wecht  of  maid  work 

stapillis  ..... 

Mair  for  ane  lock  to  ye  dur 
Mair  at  ye  ressait  of  Siluirtounhills  siluir 
Mair  at  ye  ressait  of  Alex''  Vallance  siluir  for  Ladiland 
Mair  at  ye  ressait  of  Malcum  Crawfurds  siluir 
Mair  at  ye  deliverie  of  \\'™  Cruiks  silvir     . 
Mair  at  ye  ressait  of  \V">  Hogiszards  xl  li 
Mair  at  ye  ressait  of  Jo"  Menteithes  xx  li 
Mair  at  ye  ressait  of  W"  Cunynghames  siluir 
Mair  at  ye  weing  and  wpputting  of  ye  cleiks 
Mair  at  ye  ressait  of  Gawane  Neisbits  siluir 


Suma  of  ye  discharge 


HI]  s. 

vj  s. 
xxvj  s.  8d. 
xiij  li  vj  s.  8d. 
-xvij  li  viij  d. 
of  cleiks  naillis  and 
viij  li 
V  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 
viij  s. 
vij  s. 
vj  s. 
X  s. 
X  s. 
iiij  s. 
iiij  s. 
vj  s. 
vj  s. 


viij'=xxxij  li  xiiij  s.  8d. 


Swa  charge  and  discharge  being  conferrit  y''  restis  frie 

iij'^lxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 


Quhilk  sowme  of  fywe  hunderithe  fiftie  merks  money  foirsaid  ye  haill 
deikins  and  breyrein  of  ye  deikin  conweinaris  counsall  ordeaneit  ye  sameyn  to 
be  put  in  ye  box  and  ye  pnt  deikin  conweinar  and  his  coUectour  to  be  compt- 
abill  for  ye  nixt  zeir  and  hes  ordeaneit  ye  said  deikin  conweinar  and  collecto'' 
foirsaid  to  wplift  and  ressaue  ye  non  pay's  of  ye  last  compt  abouewryttin 


1629]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  131 

viz  fra  Niniane  Andirsoun  for  Forq''is  band  of  fywe  hunderithe  merkis  fra 
Witsounday  1628  to  Witsounday  1629  threttie  thrie  pund  vj  s.  viij  d.  Item 
fronie  Jo"  Scott  lorimer  for  thrie  termes  anvvall  of  his  fywe  hunderithe  pund 
preceiding  Mertimes  1628  zeiris  last  Ixxv  li,  mair  of  non  pay'  fra  Dauid  Pollock 
for  ye  anvvall  of  his  ij^  merks  fra  Witsounday  1628  to  Mertimes  1628  sax  pund 
xiij  s.  iiij  d.  qlk  yai  also  ordeane  ye  deikin  convveinar  and  his  collecto''  to  ressaue 
and  to  be  comptabill  y''foir  ye  nixt  zeir. 

Decimo  octauo  No^is  1628. 

The  qlk  day  James  Bischop  eldest  lau'fuU  sone  to  James  Bischop  maltman  Prenteis 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  serve  Jo"  Mitschell  elder  tailzour  for  ye  space  of     '^"^  °''' 
sewin  zeiris  conforme  to  ane  indento''  of  ye  dait,  at  Glasgow  ye  first  day  of 
October  1627. 

Vigesimo  septimo  No'is  1628. 

The  qlk  day  Jo"  Brock  sone  to  Thomas  Brock  gairner  is  buikit  heirin  Prenteis 
prenteis  to  James  Clerk  tailzour  for  fywe  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for 
meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ane  indento^  of  ye  dait  ye  xxvj  of  Apryle  1627  zeiris. 

Secundo  De'is  1628. 

The  said  day  James  Pollock  sone  to  Jo"  Pollock  in  Newtoun  of  Mernis  Prenteis 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  Ro*  Pollock  cowper  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeirs  and 
twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  lie  fra  his  entrie  qlk  was  at  Candilmes  1622  conforme 
to  y'  indento^  of  ye  dait  ye  last  day  of  October  1622. 

Vigesimo  sexto  Deris  1628. 

The  said  day  Johne  Craufurd  sone  to  vmqle  Johne  Craufurd  in  Westir  Prenteis 
Craigis  is  buikit  heirin  as  prenteis  to  Johne  Maxuell  hemirma  for  ye  space  of 
sevin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  qlk  is  at  ye 
first  of  J  a''  nixt  cforme  to  y  indento^  of  ye  dait  of  yir  puts. 

Tertio  Februarij  1629. 

The  qlk  day  Jo"  Allane  sone  to  vmqle  Ro'  Allane  in  Tuachair  is  buikit  Prenteis 
prenteis  heirin  to  Gilbe  Allane  cordoner  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeirs  as  prenteis 
and  tua  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  y'to  qlk  is  at  ye  dait  heirof  cforme 
to  yf  indento^  of  ye  dait  of  yir  puts  lykwayis. 

Septimo  Februarij  1629. 

The  qlk  day  Jo"  Buchannane  sone  to  Jo"  Buchannane  in  Glasgow  is  Prenteis 
buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  serve  Thomas  Blair  weivar  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeirs     ""^  a«nan. 
as  prenteis  and  tua  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  cforme  to  y  indento^  of  ye  dait  ye 
xxvj  day  of  December  1628  zeirs. 


Prenteis  Hall. 


Prenteis 
Fischer. 


132  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1629 

Wndecimo  Februarij  1629. 

The  qlk  day  ye  deikin  conweinar  remanent  deikinis  hes  admittit  and 
ressaueit  Ro'  Salmount  to  be  in  ye  almous  in  wmqle  ^^"'"  Bogill  his  place  and 
failzeing  of  ony  of  ye  puirs  deceis  to  admitt  James  Blair  y^'to  and  in  caice  ye 
said  Ro'  Salmount  beg  at  ony  tyme  heireftir  yat  he  sail  tyne  his  place. 

Item  ressaueit  be  Thomas  Gray  Ires  of  horneing  aganes  Alex''  Vallance. 

V'igesimo  quinto  Februarij  1629. 

The  qlk  day  Alex''  Hall  sone  to  wmqle  Alex""  Hall  in  Eister  Greinleyis 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  serve  Jo°  Corsbie  sewin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa 
zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ane  indent©''  of  ye  dait  the  first  day  of 
Januar  1629  zeiris. 

PenuUinio  die  Februarij  1629. 

The  qlk  day  Johne  Fischer  sone  lau'i  to  Mathow  Fischer  mess"'  is  buikit 
heirin  prenteis  to  ^^''"  Howie  litster  for  \'e  space  of  sevin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and 
tua  zeirs  yi'eftir  for  meit  and  fie  quhais  entrie  is  at  ye  dait  of  y^  indento''  qlk 
is  daitit  of  ye  dait  of  jdr  pnts. 

PeniiUimo  Martij  1629  zeirs. 

The  qlk  day  James  Broune  sone  to  vmqle  George  Broun  in  Jyle  of  Rosnethe 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  W'"  Howie  litster  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeirs  as 
prenteis  and  tua  zeirs  yi'eftir  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  yi^to  qlk  is  at  Wit- 
sonday  nixt  cforme  to  y''  indento''  of  ye  dait  of  yir  pntis. 

Decimo  tertio  Aprilis  1629. 

The  qlk  day  Jo"  Robesone  sone  lau^i  to  vmqle  Gilbert  Robesone  in  Tempill- 
land  of  Kincaid  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  Andro  Spreull  weivar  burges  of 
Glasgow  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  tua  zeirs  y^eftir  for  meit 
and  fie  fra  his  entrie  yto  qlk  is  put  at  j^e  dait  of  yair  indento''  qlk  is  of  ye  dait 
of  yir  pntis. 

Sexto  Maij  1629. 

The  qlk  day  Ro'  Rob  sone  to  wmqle  James  Rob  in  Flemyngtoun  is  buikit 
heirin  prenteis  to  serve  Johnne  Watsoun  cordoner  sewin  zeiris  as  prenteis 
and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ane  indento^  of  ye  dait  the  thrid 
day  of  No'"  the  zeir  of  God  iajvjc  and  twentie  aucht  zeiris  and  qais  entrie  was 
at  Mtimes  last  cforme  to  ye  said  indento''. 

Horner  Lyill  The  said  day  Robert  Horner  Manasses  Lyill  Jo"  Falconer  and  Robert 

Falconer  Bell  hes  led  in  yf  new  muskattis  w'  ye  pertinentis  in  ye  almous  as  yai  quha 

muskattis.        ^^  "^^^  deikinis  yis  instant  zeir  1629  conforme  to  act  and  ordour  maid  yfanent. 


Prenteis 
Broune. 


Prenteis 
Robesone. 


Prenteis  Rob. 


1629]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  133 

Vigesimo  Maij  1629  zeirs. 

The  qlk  day   James  Thoniesone  sone  to  vmqle    James    Thomesone  in  Prenteis 
Schawtield  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  Henry  Or  wry'  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeirs 
as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  yeftir  fra  his  entrie  yto  qlk  was  at 
ye  dait  of  y  indento""  daitit  ye  penult  day  of  Marche  iajvjc  twenty  nyne  zeirs 
as  ye  same  in  ye  self  beirs. 


Qwinto  Maij  1629  zeirs. 
The  qlk  day  Johne  Snodgars  sone  to  vmqle  Malcolme  Snodgars  maissoun  Prenteis 
burges  of  Glasgow  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  Allane  Nepar  cultcller  for  ye    "°  ^"°' 
space  of  fy ve  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  cforme  to  y  indento'' 
daitit  ye  aucht  day  of  Maij  1629  ^^^^^  a-nd  ye  said  Jo"  his  entrie  is  at  ye  dait 
foirsd  of  ye  sd  indento^"  as  ye  samyn  in  ye  self  at  lenth  pports. 

Vigesimo  seciiudo  Jidij  1629. 
The  qlk  day  Ro'  Wre  sone  to  Patrik  Wre  in  Kippen  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  Prenteis  Ure. 
to  Niniane  Andirsone  cordoner  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa 
zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  yto  qlk  is  at  ye  dait  of  y  indento""  daitit 
ye  sevintein  day  of  June  1622  zeirs  as  ye  samen  beirs. 

Apud  Glasgow  quinto  Afdj  1629. 
The  qlk  day  Abrahame  Muir  sone  lau'i  to  Dauid  Muir  indwellar  y  is  buikit  Prenteis  Muir. 
heirin  prenteis  to  Dauid  Muir  smy'  burges  of  Glasgow  his  broy  for  ye  space 
of  sewin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  tua  zeirs  y''eftir  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie 
yffo  qlk  was  and  began  at  ye  dait  of  y  indento"^  qlk  is  daitit  ye  penult  day  of 
June  1629  zeirs  as  ye  samen  in  ye  self  at  lenth  pports. 

The  said  day  Williame  Thomesone  sone  lau"  to  Willia  Thomesone  in  Prenteis 
Ovirtoune  of  Curmonok  is  buikit  heirin  printeis  to  Jo"  Thomesone  maltman       opsone. 
for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  tua  zeirs  yeftir  for  meit  and    fie 
cforme  to  y  indentC  of  ye  dait  ye  fourt  day  of  Apryle  1626  zeirs  as  ye  sd  W'" 
his  entrie  q'^  was  at  ye  dait  of  ye  sd  indento"". 

26  August]  1629. 
The  qlk  day  James  Maxuell  sone  to  Ro'  Maxuell  burges  of  Paislay  is 
buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  James  Watsone  flescho"^  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeirs 
as  prenteis  fra  his  entrie  yto  qlk  was  and  began  at  ye  sewint  day  of  Julij  last 
cforme  to  ye  indento""  maid  betuix  y™  of  ye  dait  of  yir  puts  as  the  samen  in 
ye  self  at  lenth  pports. 

The  said  day  Ro'  M^^Gie  sone  to  wmqle  James  M"=Gie  cowper  indweller  Prenteis 
in  Glasgow  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  serue  W""  Brounsyd  bonnetmaker  ye  '^^'   '^' 
space  of  nyne  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to 
ye  indento'  maid  betuix  yame  of  ye  dait  of  yir  pntis. 


134 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1629 


Ker. 


Prenteis  Sim. 


Deikin 
conweinar 

Neilsoun. 


Secimdo  Odo'is  1629. 
The  qlk  day  W""  Ker  sone  to  vmqle  Jo°  Ker  girdle  maker  in  Glasgow 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  Mathow  Glen  baxter  for  ye  space  of  sevvin  zeirs 
as  prenteis  and  twa  zeir  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  yto  qlk  is  of  ye  dait  of 
yir  pnts  cforme  to  y  indento'  of  ye  dait  lykwayes  of  yir  pnts. 

xxij  Odo'  1629. 

The  qlk  day  Arthour  Sim  in  Kenmure  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  James 

Leischman  heihirman  for  ye  space  of  sevin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs 

for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  qlk  was  at  Witsounday  1629  cforme  to  y  indento"^ 

of  ye  dait  ye  secund  day  of  Apryle  1629  as  ye  samen  in  ye  self  at  lenth  pportis. 

21  of  Ociobey  1629. 
The  qlk  day  William  Neilsoun  remanent  deikinis  and  brejTein  of  his 
counsall  being  conweinit  in  ye  almoushous  for  electing  of  twa  men  w'  the  sd 
deikin  conweinaris  self  to  be  presentit  to  ye  proueist  bailleis  and  counsall 
qJ'by  ane  of  ye  thrie  may  be  electit  deikin  conweinar  for  ye  zeir  to  cum  qlk 
being  voittit  ye  said  deikin  conweinar  and  remanent  deikins  and  bre;yTein 
foirsaid  electit  W"  Howie  and  Gawane  Neisbit  zog''  wt  himself  to  be  presentit 
to  ye  proueist  bailleis  and  counsall  be  Thomas  Gray  maltman  q''by  ane  of  ye 
tlirie  may  be  electit  deikin  conweinar  for  ye  zeir  to  cwme. 

Thaireftir  William  Neilsoun  zog''  is  electit  deikin  conweinar  for  ye  zeir 
to  cwme. 

Ye  27  of  October  1629. 

The  said  day  ve  deikin  conweinar  elect  ye  persounes  following  to  be 
wpone  counsall  conforme  to  ye  ordour  Jo"  Kirkwood  Jo°  Andirsoun  James 
Ogilvie  Manasses  Lyll  Thomas  Scott  Ro*  Islwre  James  Grahame  Thomas  Gray 
Rot  Snyp  Jo»  Stewart  Patrik  Watsoun  Jo°  Hall  W™  Gowane  Jo"  Gowane 
Jo°  Padie  Thomas  ]\Iorsoun  Waltir  Dowglas  Niniane  Andirsoun  Willia  Neilsoun 
elder  Niniane  Gilhagie  Gabriell  Smythe  Jo"  Wilsoun  Gawane  Neisbit  elder 
Ro'  Horner  James  Robesoun  ba.xter  Patrik  Colquhoun  Gawane  Neisbit  zog^ 
Johne  Crawfurd  W""  Andirsoun  Thomas  Fawsyd  W™  Howie  Jo°  Andirsoun 
zoungest  George  Mwtc  Ro'  Patersoun  James  Padie  Olipheir  Pittilloche  Jo° 
Baird  Androw  Mylne  M"'  Ar<i  Lyndsay  James  Flemyng  Thomas  Nesmythe 
maltman  James  Withirspone  Jo°  Thomesoun  Jo°  M'^Kewin  Jo"  Ferrier 
Thomas  Atchesoun  Johne  Falconer  Ale.x'^  Colquhoun  Jo"  Boyd  Ro'  Pollock 
Rot  Bell  Ritchard  Allane. 

Ye  28  of  Odober  1629. 
The  qlk  day  ye  foirsaid  deikin  conweinar  remanent  deikins  and  breyrein 
of  his  counsall  be  pluralitie  of  voittis  hes  electit  Waltir  Dowglas    Niniane 
Andirsoun  W™  Howie  and  W™  Andirsoun  to  be  presentit  to  ye  dein  of  gild 
q'by  ye  said  dein  of  gild  may  sweir  yame  for  ane  zeir  to  cwme. 


1629]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  135 

xif  day  of  No'  1629. 

The  qlk  day  Johne  Fcrrier  is  admittit  collecto''  for  ye  zcir  to  cvvme  quho 
hes  maid  faithc  as  vse  is. 

The  said  day  \V'"  Caldcrwood  is  admittit  off  for  ye  zeir  to  cum. 

Decimo  terlio  No'is  1629. 

The  qlk  day  James  Gilphillip  sone  to  vmq'  James  Gilphilp  of  Gabloch 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  Jo°  M'^Kewin  litst  for  sewin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and 
twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  qlk  is  at  ye  dait  of  y  indentof  daitit 
ye  xij  of  No""  1629  zeirs  as  ye  samen  heirs. 

Decimo  iertio  No'is  1629. 

The  quhilk  day  compeirit  W'"  Neilsoun  and  Thomas  Gray  his  collecto'' 
befoir  ye  deikinis  and  remanent  brethrein  of  his  counsall  for  chargeing  yame- 
selfis  of  y''  intromissiounes  w'  ye  hospitall  guids  fra  y''  electioune  to  ye  terme 
of  Mertimes  1629  ^^'^  discharge  conforme  q^'of  ye  tenor  followes. 

[Charge]. 

Item  in  ye  first  conteinit  in  ye  box  q''of  compt  is  maid  be  bands 

iij<=lxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  fra  ye  deikinis  ......  it^lvi  ti 

Item  ressaueit  fra  Siluirtounhill  for  ye  anwall  of  v"^  li  fra  Mertimes  1628  to 

Mertimes  1629  ......  xlv  ll 

Item  fra  Dauid  Pollock  of  non  pay's  of  his  ij<=  merks  fra  Witsounday  1628  to 

Mertimes  y^eftir  .....    xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  Charlis  Mowat  frome  Mertimes  1628  to  Mertimes  1629  ^o""  ^'^  ^°^i" 

hunderithe  merkis       ....  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  Alex''  Wallance  for  wmqle  Ladielandis  band  of  iiij*^  merk  ye  saids 

termes  1628  to  Mertimes  1629  •  •  ^^^'J  "^  ^"i  s-  "'J  ^■ 

Item  frome  Gawane  Neisbit  for  his  fywe  hunderithe  punds  fra  Mertimes  1628 

to  Mertimes  1629         ......  xlv  ll 

Item  fra  Malcum  Crawfurd  for  his  fywe  hunderithe  merks  fra  Mertimes  1628 

to  Mertimes  1629         ......  xxx  li 

Item  frome  Johnne  Scott  for  his  fywe  cli  preceiding  Mertimes  1628  in  pairt 

of  pay'  of  Ixxv  li  be  ye  auld  compt     .  .  .  .  1  li 

Item  fra  Jo°  Andirsoun  for  j«  merks  fra  Witsounday  1629  to  Witsounday  1630 

vjH 
Item  fra  W™  Cruiks  for  his  siluir  fra  Mertimes  1628  to  Witsounday  1629     x  1 
Item  of  burges  siluir  .....  xxxij  ll  ix  s.  vj  d. 

Item  ye  mortclaithe  siluir  ....   xvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  ye  rentall  siluir  .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  ll 

Item  ye  litstaris  qrter  comptis       .  .  .  .     vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 


136  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1629 

Item  ressaueit  frome  Niniane  Andirsoun  for  Forq''is  v'=  merk  fra  Witsounday 
1628  to  Witsounday  1629  being  non  payet  in  ye  last  compt 

xxxiij  'h  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  Jo"  Luiff  for  ye  anwall  of  his  iiij"^  merks  fra  Witsounday  1629  to 
Witsounday  1630         ......        xxiiij  ll 

Item  fra  Johnne  Reid  wricht  for  ye  anwall  of  his  j'^l  ll  .      xj  ll  v  s. 

Item  frome  M""  Gawane  Hamiltoun  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  his  iiij'^  li  fra  Mertimes 
1628  to  Mertimes  1629  ye  samyn  not  being  taine  wp  befoir  hand        xl  li 

Item  fra  ye  ex^  of  wmqle  Jein  Cunyngha  of  legacie         vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  ressaueit  frome  M"^  George  Sempill     .  .        iij^^xxxiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  from  Jo°  Luiff  .  .  .  .  .  •       (  ) 

Suma  of  ye  charge     .  .  .  j^Jiij<^xx  ll  xv  s.  vj  d. 

Discharge. 

Item  gewin  out  of  siluir  yat  was  in  ye  box  to  M''  Gawane  Harniltoun  and  his 
cau^is  .......  iiij'^  ll 

Item  to  ye  puir  men  .  .  .  .  .  .  j^'lx  ll 

Item  for  peittis  and  coillis  .....  xiiij  ll 

Item  to  Patrik  Leinzeis  wyf  be  ane  warrand  .  .       v  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  Stein  Rowan  for  wmqle  M""  Johnne  Howiesounes  bursour  be    ane 
discharge         .....  Ixvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  kaberis  to  ye  puir  mennis  beddis  and  wpbringing  y^'of  viij  s. 

Item  to  Nicoll  Scott  for  nyne  ell  of  gem  hecklingis  to  be  ane  pair  of  scheittis 

iij  ll  iij  s.  iiij  d. 

Mair  for  ane  cowering  to  him         .....        xlviij  s. 

Mair  for  strea  to  y'  beddis  .....        xxiiij  s. 

Mair  for  dressing  of  Nicoll  Scottis  bed        ....  iiij  s. 

Mair  for  sax  ellis  blew  claithe  to  be  ane  gowne  to  him  xiij  li  ifij  s. 

Mair  to  Symon  Baird  for  four  ellis  half  ane  qrter  of  gray  claithe     vj  ll  iij  s.  iiij  d. 

Mair  for  ye  making  of  ane  pair  of  scheittis  and  heming  of  ane  cowering 

iiij  s.  vj  d. 

Item  to  W™  Calderwood  for  ane  pair  of  schoone    .  .  xxvj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  for  ye  making  of  ane  stand  of  claithes  and  ane  gowne  to  Nicoll  Scott 

xxxvj  s. 

Item  to  W"*  Bogill  ane  litill  befoir  his  buriall         .  .  .  vj  s. 

Item  for  ye  making  of  ane  stand  of  claithes  to  Symon  Baird  .  xx  s. 

Item  to  Lawrie  Schaw  for  thrie  ellis  thrie  qrteris  of  gray  claithe      v  ll  xij  s.  vj  d. 

Item  for  thrie  ellis  hardin  to  Ij'ne  his  claithe  .  .  .  x.x  s. 

Item  to  James  Blair  cordoner  be  ane  warrand       .  .  .  iiij  ll 

Item  to  Jo^  Bogill  be  ane  warrand  .  .  .  .  iij  ll 

Item  to  Ro'  Salmount  for  nyne  ell  of  genhecklingis  to  be  ane  pair  of  scheitts 

iij   li  iiij  s. 


i62y]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  137 

Mair  for  ane  cowering  to  him         .....        xlviij  s. 
Mair  for  dressing  his  bed  in  workmanschip  and  kaberis  .  .  x  s. 

Item  to  Symon  Baird  at  diuers  tymes  to  buy  oyle  to  dress  ye  musketts     viij  s. 
Item  mair  for  ye  making  of  Ro'  Scdmounts  scheitis  and  heming  of  his  cowering 

iiij  s. 
Item  for  bringing  wp  of  sewin  stane  ellewin  pund  of  irone  .  ij  s. 

Item  to  ye  aris  and  ex'is  of  ye  said  wmqle  Jo"  Vallance  being  at  xxxvj  s  ye 

staine      inde  ......        xiij  li  vj  s.  8d. 

Item  to  Peitir  Gemill  for  sewin  stane  iij  lb.  half  pund  of  irone  at  ye  foirsaid 

price      inde    .......  xiij  tl 

Mair  for  ye  beiring  wp  y'"of  .....  iiij  s. 

Mair   for  viij  lb.   of  leid  to  batt   ye  stainecho's  .  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  James  Elphingstoun  and  his  sone  for  ye  out  taicking  of  ye  glas  windois 

and  imputting  and  mending  y^'of  .  .  .  iij  ll  ij  s. 

Item  to  Jo"  Maxwall  smythe  for  ye  making  of  ye  irone  windois      iij  t  iij  s. 
Item  to  Ro*  Boyd  for  ye  making  of  ye  ragaling  of  ye  windois  and  hoillis  to 

staincheo^s      .......        x.xiiij  s. 

Item  for  ye  wptacking  and  downe  tacking  of  ye  stainechoris  to  Jo"  Maxuall  iij  s. 
Mair  for  drink  to  ye  workmen        .... 

Item  to  Jo"  Bryssoun  for  chargeing  of  Jo"  Vallance  wyfe 

Item  to  wmqle  Jone  Scheillis  wyf  be  ane  warrand 

Item  at  ye  ressait  of  M'  George  Sempillis  v<=  merks 

Item  to  W"'  Calderwood  wpone  ane  warrand 

Item  to  Androw  Allassoun  wpone  ane  warrand      .  .      iij 

Item  to  Ro'  Miller  be  ane  warrand 

Item  to  W">  Calderwood  for  ane  bonnett  . 

Item  to  Androw  Allassoun  wpone  ane  warrand      .  iij 

Item  to  Ro*  Salmont  for  ane  pair  of  hois  and  making  of  ya 

Item  to  Jo"  Dowglas  for  twa  ellis  of  gray  claithe  and  making  y'^oi    iij  ll  xvj  s. 

Item  to  Lawrie  Schaw  for  fywe  ell  ane  qrter  of  ane  ell  blew  claithe  to  be  ane 

gowne  price  of  ye  ell  xl  s.     inde  .  .  .  .       x  li  x  s. 

Mair  for  half  ane  ell  and  ane  naill  of  gray  claithe  to  be  hois  and  making  y^oi 

xxj  s. 
Mair  for  ye  making  of  his  gowne   .  .  .  .  .  xx  s. 

Mair  for  ane  pan  to  yame  .....       xxxvj  s. 

Item  to  M''  George  Sempill  for  ye  anwall  of  his  j'lj  merks     Ixvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  gewin  out  to  Allaster  of  Barmalloche  and  his  caui'is  be  ane  band  to  be  put 

in  ye  bo.x         .......  iiijc  % 

Item  to  James  Braidwood  of  fie     .  .  .  xiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  for  ye  intaicking  and  outputting  of  ye  foirsaid  money  at  diuers  tymes   iij  li 

Suiiia  of  ye  discharge  .  .  j^Jij<=lxvj  li  ij  s.  vd. 

Restis  de  claro  .  .  .  .       liiij  li  xiij  s.  j  d. 


xni)  s. 

xij  s. 

iiij  ll 

vH 

iij  ll 

1  vj  s. 

viij  d. 

. 

xH 

xiij  s 

iiij  d. 

i  vj  s. 

viij  d. 

. 

xxj  s. 

138 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1629 


Prenteis 
Patirsoae. 


Prenteis 
Andirsoae 


Prenteis 
Bryssoune. 


Prenteis 
M'Clair. 


Prenteis 
Cochrane. 


Snyp. 


The  qlk  sowme  of  fiftie  four  pund  xiij  s.  j  d.  ye  deikins  ordeaneit  ye 
deikin  conweinar  and  his  collecto''  to  be  comptabill  for  ye  nixt  compt  togidder 
w't  j-e  non  pay'is  wnderwryttin  not  ressaueit  in  ye  last  compt  viz  Dauid  Pollock 
for  ye  anwall  of  his  money  frome  Mertimes  1628  to  Mertimes  1629  xiij  ti  vj  s. 
viij  d.  mair  Jo"  Scott  restand  of  his  siluir  preceiding  Mertimes  1628  xxv  ll 
and  Niniane  Andirsoun  for  Forq^is  band  fra  Witsounday  1629  to  Mertimes 
y^'eft  XV]  i  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  and  dischargis  ye  said  deikin  conweinar  and  his  collecto'' 
yi'of  for  evvir. 

ig  day  of  J  a'  1630  zeiris. 

The  qlk  day  Jo"  Patersoun  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  serue  Daniell 
Andirsoun  cowper  for  ye  space  of  aucht  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  ae  zeir  for  meit 
and  fie  y^'eftir  conforme  to  ane  indento"'  of  ye  dait,  at  Glasgow  ye  nynetein 
of  Ja'  1630. 

The  said  day  (  )  Andirsoun  naturall  sone  to  Daniell  Andirsoun 

cowper  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  serue  his  said  fay''  for  ye  space  of  {  ) 

zeiris  conforme  to  his  indento''  of  ye  dait  (  )  day  of  (  ) 

jajvjc  and  (  )  zeiris. 

The  said  day  George  Bryssoun  sone  to  Androw  Bryssoun  in  Hilheid  of 
Eistwood  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  James  Flemving  cordoner  for  ye  space 
of  sewin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  y'  indento'' 
of  ye  dait  ye  tent  of  No''  1629. 

Nynt  of  Februar  1630. 
The  said  day  Johnne  Mi^Clair  sone  to  Jo"  Mf^Clair  in  Gorbellis  now  in 
Glasgow  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  Jo"  Duncane  weiwar  for  ye  space  of  sewin 
zeiris  conforme  to  y^  indento^  of  ye  dait  of  yir  pntis. 

The  said  day  Johnne  Coicheran  sone  to  Thomas  Coicheran  in  Cairnwall 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  Michell  Leikprivick  skynner  for  sewin  zeiris  and  twa 
zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  fra  entrie  conforme  to  y^  indento''  of  ye  dait  ye  aucht 
of  Februar  1630  zeiris. 

xj  of  Februar  1630  zeiris. 

The  qlk  day  W"'  Neilsoun  deikin  conweinar  remanent  deikins  and  breyrein 
of  his  counsall  being  conweinit  in  ye  craftis  almoushous  for  heiring  of  ane 
complaint  gewin  in  be  Ro*  Snyp  ane  of  ye  saidis  deikinis  aganes  Gabriell 
Allassoun  ane  of  ye  said  deikin  his  sworne  broy'  makand  mentioun  that  q'' 
the  said  Ro'  Snyp  be  vertew  of  ane  chartour  grantit  be  [the]  towne  to  [the] 
haill  cowperis  and  yf  successouris  in  office  to  schewe  all  and  q'sumever 
wnsufficient  work  it  sould  happin  ony  of  said  brey'  of  ye  calling  wirk  being 
notabill  to  serue  ye  kingis  legis  and  trew  it  is  that  ye  said  Ro'  conforme  to 
ye  said  chartour  accompaneit  w»  his  m^is  hed  to  schewe  ye  said  Gabriell  his 


1630]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  139 

work  and  haueing  apprehendit  ane  wnsufficient  kirne  q^in  of  befoir  he  was 
dischargit  and  ye  said  deikin  and  m^is  haueing  confiscatt  ye  samyn  and  cumyng 
away  wt  ye  samyn  trew  it  is  that  ye  said  Gabriell  come  to  yame  and  vterit 
manie  injurious  speitchis  aganes  ye  said  Ro'  and  not  being  content  y'wt  he 
pulht  wp  his  hand  and  hatt  the  said  deikin  on  ye  halfett  ctrar  his  aithe  of 
obedience  as  ye  cleime  beiris,  quhilk  cleime  being  hard  and  considerit  and 
confest  be  ye  said  Gabriell  himself  yat  he  out  of  his  druckin  humor  did  ye 
samyn  and  became  in  ye  deikin  conweinar  and  deikins  will  quhilk  being  ryplie 
advysit  the  said  deikin  conweinar  remanent  deikins  and  breyrein  of  his  counsall 
all  in  ane  voice  decernis  ye  said  Gabriell  to  mak  homadge  to  ye  deikin  at  ye 
mercat  croce  y"'  confessing  his  fault  and  crawing  God  and  his  deikin  pardoun 
yffoir  and  to  pay  to  ye  puir  of  ye  decayit  brey^  of  ye  cowper  craft  ane  new 
upsett  anserabill  to  y^  chartour  at  q'  tyme  ye  deikin  and  his  brey^  pleisis. 

The  said  day  anent  ye  complaint  maid  be  Ro'  Mwre  dekin  of  ye  wrichtis 
aganes  William  Campbell  ane  of  his  brey''  makand  mentioun  that  q"'  wpone 
ye  xxiij  day  of  September  last  or  y^'by  being  ye  day  ye  haill  deikins  was  choisin 
the  said  Ro'  being  admittit  and  sworne  deikin  be  electioun  the  said  William 
fallis  out  w'  wmqle  Ar**  Kirkwood  in  malicious  wordis  and  not  being  content 
y^v'  he  puUit  out  ae  edgit  quhinger  and  y""  in  judgment  invadit  ye  said  wmqle 
Ar''  as  ye  said  cleime  beiris  quhilk  also  being  confest  [be]  William  Campbell 
and  being  cwme  in  ye  deikin  conweinars  and  remanent  deikins  y^  will  y''foir 
the  said  deikin  conweinar  remanent  deikins  and  breyrein  foirsaid  decernes 
William  Campbell  to  pay  to  ye  deikinis  for  ye  said  fault  fywe  pundis  money 
at  q'  tyme  saids  deikinis  pleisis  and  to  mak  homadge  to  his  deikin  and  sicklyk 
decernes  ye  said  William  to  content  and  pay  to  ye  puir  of  ye  craftis  hospitall 
the  sowme  of  twentie  pundis  in  caice  ye  said  William  trubill  or  molest  his 
deikin  or  his  successouris  in  ony  tyme  heireftir  ye  samyn  being  qualifeyit  and 
to  remane  in  ward  q"  ye  samyn  be  payit  and  ordeanes  ye  said  deikin  to 
ressaue  ye  said  W™  to  his  office  of  ofiiciarie  to  ye  craft  for  yis  pnt  zeir  and  to 
ingather  ye  casualiteis  to  ye  weill  of  ye  craft. 

Vigesimo  quinlo  Fehruarij  1630. 

The  qlk  day  Johne  Pincartoune  sone  lau"  to  vmqle  Andro  Pincartoune  Prenteis 
burges  of  Ruyglen  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  Robert  Murdoche  cordoner  for 
ye  space  of  sewin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  tua  zeirs  yi'eftir  for  meit  and  fie  his  entrie 
is  at  ye  dait  heirof  cforme  to  ye  indentof  maid  amangs  y™  lykwayes  of  ye  dait 

of  yir  pntis. 

Prima  Martij  1630. 

The  qlk  day  George  Moffet  sone  lau"  to  vmqle  Jaes  Moffet  in  Cairnhill  Prenteis 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  Johne  M^Bend  hemirman  for  sewin  zeirs  as  prenteis 
and  tua  zeirs  yeftir  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  yto  qlk  was  at  ye  secund 
of  Februar  last  cforme  to  y  indento''  of  ye  dait  heirof. 


Pincartoun. 


140  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1630 

Tertio  Martij  1630. 

Preateis  Scot.  The  qlk  day  Johne  Scot  sone  lau"  to  Jo"  Scot  induellar  in  Glasgow  is 

buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  Allexr  Holmes  fleschor  for  sewin  zeirs  prenteis  and 
tua  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  qlk  is  at  j'e  dait  of  ye  indento^  daitit 
yis  dait. 

Vigesimo  tertio  Aprilis  1630. 

Neill.  The  qlk  day  ye  deikin  conweinar  remanent  deikinis  w*  Jo°  Padie,  baillie, 

Waltir  Dowglas  and  Niniane  Andirsoun  being  conweinit  in  ye  almoushous 
anent  ye  alledgit  conclusioun  of  ane  act  of  counsall  of  ye  towne  for  admitting 
Jo°  Neill  notar  and  dresser  of  ye  towne  bulks  frieman  w'  ye  smeithis  qlk  was 
referrit  to  ye  said  deikin  conweinar  remanent  deikinis  and  breyrein  foirsaid 
and  y'eftir  the  samyn  being  considerit  the  said  haill  deikinis  and  brejTein 
foirsaid  all  in  ane  voice  concludit  that  ye  said  Jo°  Neill  salbe  ane  frieman  w' 
ye  said  hamermen  in  yis  soirt  that  he  sail  conweine  w'  ye  said  hamermen  for 
counsall  to  be  gewin  be  him  to  ye  glorie  of  God  weill  of  ye  cuntrie  his  majesteis 
honor. 

xxj  day  of  Maij  1630  zeirs. 

Prenteis steiU.  The  quhilk  day  Ro*  Steill  sone  to  Johne  Steill  in  Mylntoune  Crivoch  is 

buikit  heirin  to  be  prenteis  to  Ro'  Steill  elder  skinner  burges  of  Glasgow  for 
ye  space  of  sevin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  tua  zeirs  yeftir  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his 
entrie  yto  qlk  is  at  ye  dait  of  thir  pnts  conforme  to  y''  indento''  of  the  daitt 
heirof. 

xviij  day  of  Junij  1630. 

The  said  day  ye  deikin  conweinar  declarit  that  he  had  ressaueit  twentie 
ae  punds  of  ye  first  daillis  c^ol  y'  was  gewin  ten  merk  to  Ro'  Dowglas  fywe 
merk  to  Androw  AUassoun  and  .xxihj  s.  to  Mathow  Ker  and  xij  s.  to  W™ 
Calderwood  qi'of  yf  restis  viij  ll  .xvj  s.  to  be  put  in  ye  box  and  ye  collecto'' 
to  be  comptabill  y^loir. 

xxvij  of  June  1630. 
Prenteis  The  qlk  day  Andro  Mwre  sone  to  Thomas  Mwre  mariner  is  buikit  heirin 

to  be  prenteis  to  Johne  Fultoune  in  his  airt  and  calling  as  ane  skinner  for  the 
space  of  sewin  zeiris  fra  his  entrie  thairto  qlk  is  at  the  daitt  of  thir  pnttis 
conforme  to  thair  indento''  of  the  daitt  the  twentie  thrie  of  June  1630. 

Penidtimo  Junij  1630. 

The  qlk  day  ye  deikin  conveinar  and  haill  remanent  deikins  of  yis  bru' 
and  his  counsell  being  conveinit  in  ye  tolbuithe  y^'of  anent  ane  complaint 
gewin  in  be  Robert  Snype  deikin  of  ye  couperis  of  Glasgow  aganes  Cuthbert 
Greg  couper  makand  mentioune  y'  q""  ye  sd  Cuthbert  au'  to  be  lyable  to  ye 


1630]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  141 

deikin  conveinar  and  remanent  deikines  censure  and  punischment  for  his 
wndiscreit  vnmanerlie  and  contumelious  behaviour  toward  ye  sd  Ro'  his 
deikin  cmitit  at  divers  occa~unes  to  ye  evill  example  of  wyi's  and  specially  by 
geiving  him  ane  lie  in  his  face  in  Thomas  Glenis  hous  vpon  ye  muistir  day 
last  as  also  in  saying  his  pryde  wold  mak  him  ane  beggar  w'  divers  wyi's 
wncomelie  speiches  and  y^'foir  besocht  ye  sd  deikin  conveinar  and  remanent 
deikines  to  tak  sic  ordof  yanent  as  apperteinit  to  ye  terro'  of  wy's  to  wse  ye 
lyke  cariage  in  tyme  comeing  as  ye  sd  cplaint  at  lenth  makis  mentioune  qlk 
being  publictlie  red  in  pns  of  bay*  ye  sdis  pairties  and  y  ry'is  and  ressounes 
being  hard  ynntill  (  ) 

[The  above  entry  is  crossed  out.] 

[xxvij  Junij  1630.] 

The  said  day  James  Andirsoun  sone  naturall  to  Daniell  Andirsoun  cowper  Prenteis 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  serue  ye  said  Daniell  prenteis  and  seruand  for  ye  to" Andirsoun. 
space  of  ellewin  zeiris  fra  his  entrie  qlk  was  wpone  ye  xxv  day  of  Apryle  1620 
zeiris  conforme  to  y"'  indento''  of  ye  said  dait. 

xxviij  of  June  1630. 

The  qlk  day  W™  Fleiming  broy  germane  to  Johne  Fleiming  in  Morray  is  Prenteis 
buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  James  Fleiming  cordoner  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeirs  ''''^""'"S- 
as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  yeftir  fra  his  entrie  yto  qlk  was  and 
began  at  ye  dait  of  y  indento''  daitit  ye  sevintein  day  of  November  1624  zeirs 
as  ye  samen  beirs. 

Wndecimo  August]  1630. 

The  qlk  day  yair  is  imput  in  ye  box  ane  band  of  Siluirtounehill  and  his 
caul's  ccerning  v'^l  ti  to  be  payit  at  Witsonday  1631  and  ane  band  grantit  be 
W"  Howie  and  his  cau^  of  viij*^  and  xl  merks  to  be  payit  at  Mtimes  nixt. 

Eodem  die  et  ano  praescripi. 

The  qlk  day  ye  deikin  conveinar  haill  deikins  and  his  counsell  being 
conveinit  in  ye  craftis  hospitall  of  Glasgow  anent  ye  supplica'une  gewin  to 
y""  be  Waltir  Galbraithe  tailzeo''  burges  of  Glasgow  makand  mentioune  that 
quhair  yir  monie  and  divers  zeirs  bygaine  he  had  haldin  and  treinit  wp  Johne 
Galbraithe  his  sone  in  eruditioune  and  learning  at  ye  gramer  schoole  of  yis 
bru'  q"  y*  now  he  is  past  his  cours  yairintill  and  he  being  maist  willing  be 
Godis  grace  to  atteine  to  farder  knawledge  of  Ires  and  to  spend  his  dayes 
yintill  and  wndirstanding  y'  they  had  ye  place  of  ane  bursour  now  vaicand 
in  ye  colledge  intreatit  y  wisdomes  to  admit  him  yintill  as  ye  petitioune  gevin 
in  yanent  beiris  and  sicklyke  anent  ane  wy  supplica'une  gewin  in  to  y"  be 
Thomas  Brok  makand  mentioune  y*  q''  it  is  of  veritie  y'  q^  he  had  ane  sone 


142 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1630 


Dalrimpill. 


Prenteis  Muir. 


Prenteis 
Fauldis. 


namit  (  )  ane  ressonable  guid  scholer  and  was  now  readie  to  goe 

to  ye  colledge  and  hes  na  meines  of  his  awin  to  hold  him  yat  and  wndirstanding 
y'  they  had  ye  place  vaicand  of  ane  burso^  ye  nixt  zeir  he  thocht  guid  to  give 
in  his  petitioune  beseiking  ye  sd  deikin  cveinar  remanent  deikins  and  breith- 
reine  of  counsell  to  grant  him  ane  warrand  to  ye  prin"  and  regentis  to  the 
effect  foirsd  as  ye  petitioune  at  lenth  beirs  qlkis  twa  petitiounes  being  bayt 
red  hard  seine  and  csiderit  be  ye  sd  deikin  cveinar  remanent  deikins  and 
breithreine  of  counsell  and  they  y''wt  being  ryplie  advysit  be  pluralitie  of 
woitis  they  ordanit  pnta'une  to  be  maid  and  gewin  to  ye  sd  Johne  Galbray' 
of  bursarie  to  be  pntit  to  ye  prin"  and  regentis  of  ye  Colledge  of  Glasgow  at 
Michaelmes  nixt  y'  he  may  be  admitit  yto  for  ye  space  of  four  zeirs  y''eftir 
being  fund  qualifiet  be  yame  and  in  cace  he  be  not  fund  qualifiet  to  be  repartit 
bak  y'  ane  wy  qualifiet  persone  may  be  preterit  be  y™  to  bruik  ye  place  of 
ane  bursour  w*in  ye  said  colledge  ye  tyme  foirsd  qi'vpon  ye  sd  Waltir  askit 
actis. 

The  said  day  anent  ye  supplica'une  gewin  in  be  Robert  Dalrimpill  sone 
naturall  to  Johne  Dalrimpill  tailzeo^  makand  mentioune  y'  q"^  ye  said  Jo° 
his  father  band  him  prenteis  to  vmqle  Johne  Baird  weivar  for  ye  space  of 
sewin  zeirs  cforme  to  ye  indento^  past  betuix  ws  yanent  of  ye  dait  ye  saxt 
day  of  Mai]  jaivjc  tuentie  twa  zeirs  and  albeit  it  be  of  veritie  }'*  he  had  servit 
ye  sd  vmqle  Johne  be  ye  space  of  four  zeirs  or  yairby  befoir  his  deeds  and  sen 
syne  had  servit  Ar"*  and  Johne  Patirsones  weivars  friemen  of  ye  calling 
leillelie  and  trewlie  ye  haill  sewin  zeirs  cteinit  in  his  sd  indento''  and  becaus 
it  was  negligentlie  oitit  to  be  buikit  heirin  conforme  to  ye  Ire  of  gildrie  he 
humblie  besocht  ye  sd  deikin  conveinar  remanent  deikins  and  breithreine 
of  his  csell  to  bulk  him  heirin  to  ye  effect  he  may  have  ye  benefite  of  ane  burges 
w'in  yis  bru*  as  ye  supplica~une  gewin  in  yanent  at  lenth  beirs  qlk  being  red 
hard  seine  and  csiderit  be  ye  said  deikin  conveinar  deikins  and  counsell  they 
all  in  ane  voice  ordanit  ye  said  Ro'  Dalrimple  supplicant  to  be  buikit  heirin 
cforme  to  his  said  indentof  to  ye  effect  abouewrittin  q^'vpon  ye  said  Ro*  askit 
actis. 

Vigesimo  septimo  An''  1630. 

The  qlk  day  Robert  Muir  sone  naturall  to  George  Muir  elder  portioner  of 
Polmadie  is  buikit  heirin  as  prenteis  to  George  Muir  couper  his  broy  for  ye 
space  of  sewin  zeirs  as  prenteis  fra  his  entrie  yto  qlk  salbe  and  begin  at 
Michaelmes  nixt  cforme  to  his  indento'  of  ye  dait  of  yir  pnts. 

Vndecimo  Odohris  1630. 

The  qlk  day  Andro  Faulds  sone  lau"  to  vmqle  Johne  Faulds  in  Corslie 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  Ro'  Andirsone  sk^Tiner  for  ye  space  of  sewin  zeirs 
as  prenteis  and  tua  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  yto  qlk  was  at  Mertimes 
last  cforme  to  y  indento""  of  ye  dait  heirof. 


1630]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  143 

Apud  Glasgow  decimo  tertio  Odobris  Anno  Domini  1630. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacon  convenar  and  his  bretherin  hes  electit  and 
admittit  Willia  Zair  not  thair  clerk  quha  being  pnt  acceptit  the  samynn  in 
and  vpoun  him  and  gav  his  ay'  as  effeirit. 

The  qlk  day  the  deikin  convenar  being  convenit  with  ye  haill  dekins  Act  aganst 
(except  Willia  Fawsyd)  and  bretherine  of  y'  counsall  for  to  elect  ane  new  "  ^ 
lytt  to  be  presentit  to  ye  towne  counsall  for  ye  electing  of  ane  new  dekine 
convenar  the  haill  dekins  pnt  and  maist  p'  of  ye  bretherine  of  y^  counsall 
ordanit  that  befoir  any  new  electioun  the  act  qlk  sould  haue  bein  sett  doun  in 
y''  bulk  anent  ye  complent  gevin  in  of  befoir  befoir  thame  be  Johne  Kirkwood 
than  dekin  of  hamermene  aganst  Willia  Stalker  goldsmy'  sould  be  first  buikit 
becaus  the  samynn  was  omitit  and  not  buikit  throw  ye  deceis  of  vmqi'  James 
Braidwood  not  than  y""  clerk.  Lykis  the  said  Johne  Kirkwood  producit  ane 
bill  of  complent  conforme  to  ye  tenno''  of  ye  first  (as  was  known  to  thame) 
makand  mentioun  that  q''  in  ye  monethe  of  (  )  last  bypast  the 

sd  Johne  as  deacone  being  distributing  the  crafts  daillis  at  ye  Brumlaw  he 
askit  contribu^un  fra  ye  said  Willia  to  Charlis  Pollok  his  heiche  according 
as  the  rest  of  his  bretherine  of  craft  had  gevin  qlk  the  said  Willia  refuisit  then 
ye  said  Johne  than  dekin  anserit  him  that  he  sould  get  na  daillis  except  he 
payit  ye  said  contributioune  quha  anserit  ye.  sd  dekine  that  if  he  war  hangit 
he  sould  have  daillis  and  not  being  content  y^'with  he  said  to  ye  sd  Johne  it 
become  na  bowtchors  sone  to  speik  to  him  with  his  bannet  on  and  vtterit 
aganst  him  also  sindrie  injurious  speichis  qlk  was  of  befoir  declairit  to  thame 
qlk  complent  being  hard  of  befoir  be  thame  the  sd  Johne  and  Willia  quha 
denayit  the  samynn  being  baith  pnt  and  in  respect  that  ye  samynn  was  thane 
sufficientlie  provin  be  ye  depositioun  of  divers  famous  witness  quha  war 
ressavit  and  e.xaminat  yvpoun  thairfoir  they  now  as  of  befoir  decernis  and 
ordanis  the  said  Willia  Stalker  never  to  be  wairnit  be  ye  present  dekin  of  his 
craft  nor  na  dekine  that  sail  happin  to  be  electit  in  tyme  cuing  sua  that  he 
may  not  be  reput  as  ane  brother  amongest  thame  and  ye  dekine  that  in  ony 
tyme  heireftir  sail  convein  ye  sd  Willia  w'  ye  rest  or  giv  him  ony  office  or  voitt 
in  ye  craft  sail  pay  to  ye  pur  of  y  hospitall  the  sowme  of  tuentie  punds  moey 
toties  quoties  eftir  ye  samynn  beis  qualifeit  and  that  for  his  foirsdis  injurious 
words  gevin  be  him  to  ye  sd  dekin  conforme  to  ane  act  sett  doun  of  befoir 
aganst  vmqi'  Johne  Clerk  weifer  for  ye  lyk  caus. 

The  said  day  Willia  Neilsoun  deacone  convenar  deaconis  and  remanent  Lyttis. 
bretherine  of  y'  counsall  being  convent  in  y''  hospitall  for  ye  electing  of  three 
persones  of  thair  nwmber  to  be  pntit  to  ye  provest  bailleis  and  csall  of  this 
bru'  to  ye  effect  that  ane  of  the  sd  three  persones  may  be  electit  new  deacon 
convenar  for  ye  zeir  to  cum  be  pluralitie  of  voittis  they  electit  and  noiat  Niniane 
Andersone  Johne  Andersone  elder  cordoneris  and  Niniane  Gilhagie  maltmane 


144 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1630 


on  lyt  to  be  presentit  to  ye  saids  provest  bailleis  and  csall  be  Thomas  Gray 
and  Gabriell  Smy*  to  ye  effect  ane  of  thame  may  be  chosin  dekin  convenar 
for  ye  zeir  to  cum. 

Thaireftir  the  sd  Johne  Andersone  is  electit  dekin  convenar  for  ye  zeir 
enschewing. 

Apud  Glasgow  decimo  quarto  Oc"'  1630. 

Counsaii.  The  said  day  the  said  Johne  Andersone  dekin  convenar  electit  ye  persones 

following  to  be  vpoun  his  csall  conform  to  ye  ordoi^  Gabriell  Smy'  Johne 
Wilsoun  Johne  M\vre  Johne  Biggart  Willia  Fawsyd  Johne  Falconer  Johne 
Stewart  Ro*  Snyp  Johne  Baird  Thomas  Gray  Johne  Hall  Patrick  Watsoun 
Willia  Govane  Dauid  Jack  Thomas  Morsoun  Johne  Padie  Waltir  Dowglas 
Willia  Neilsoun  zounger  Niniane  Andersone  Willia  Neilsoun  elder  Niniane 
Gilhagie  Willia  Howie  Johne  Crawfurd  Johne  Andersone  Johne  Thomesone 
Ro'  Patersone  Willia  Andersone  Rit chart  Allane  James  Flemyng  James  Ogilvie 
Gawin  Neisbit  elder  Gawin  Neisbit  zounger  Johne  Kirkwood  Olipher  Pittilloche 
Johne  Boyd  Thomas  Fawsyd  Thomas  Scott  James  Robesone  Manasses  Lyll 
Johne  Love  Ro'  Mwre  Patrik  Colquhoun  Alex'"  Colquhoun  Ro'  Pollok  Ro' 
Horner  Johne  M<=Kewin  George  Mwre  Androw  Mylne  Ro'  Andersone  Henrie 
Robesone  Patrik  Clerk  so  maney  of  ye  qlks  persones  as  war  pnt  acceptit  ye 
sd  office  in  and  vpoun  thame  and  gav  y  ay's  de  fideli  administra'ne. 

Bretherine  of  The  said  day  the  dekin  convenar  dekins  and  bretherin  of  y  csall  quha 

^U(f  ^*°^  °'  war  pnt  be  pluralitie  of  voitis  electit  Walter  Dowglas  Willia  Neilsoun  zounger 
Niniane  Andersone  and  Willia  Howie  to  be  y''  four  men  vpoun  ye  deane  of 
gild  his  csall  for  the  zeir  to  cum  conforme  to  ye  Ire  of  gildrie. 


Homer 
collecto'. 


Poore. 


Apud  Glasgow  duodecimo  No"'  1630. 

The  qlk  day  Robert  Horner  tailzo''  be  pluralitie  of  voitis  is  choysin  and 
electit  collector  to  ye  hospitall  for  ane  zeir  to  cii  quha  being  pnt  acceptit  ye 
sd  office  in  and  vpoun  him  and  gave  his  ay'  as  vse  is. 

The  said  day  the  dekin  convenar  declairit  that  Johne  Maxwall  merchand 
hes  gevin  in  twentie  marks  moey  for  ye  help  of  ye  pure  of  y  hospitall  and 
yffoir  ordains  ye  collecto"'  to  be  comptable  y^'foir. 


Compt 

Ferrier. 


Ait  Glasgow  xvij  of  November  1630. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacon  convenar  deaconis  and  remanent  bretherine  of 
yr  csall  being  convenit  within  ye  tolbuithe  of  ye  said  bru'  for  ye  heiring  of 
Johne  Ferrier  maltmane  his  compt  with  ye  guids  intrometit  with  be  him 
pertenyg  to  y'  hospitall  fra  ye  xij  of  No''  last  was  to  Michaelmas  last  the  said 
Johne  producit  ye  compt  following  q^'with  he  chargit  himself  viz : 


1630]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  145 

In  ye  first  receavit  be  him  {ra  Johne  Forquhair  for  ye  anwall  of  his  fyve 
hundrethe  marks  fra  Witsonday  1629  to  Mertimes  y''efter 

xvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Mair  fra  him  for  ye  anwall  of  ye  sd  sowme  fra  Mertimes  1629  to  Witsonday 
1630  .....  XV)  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  fra  Willia  Cunynghame  for  ye  anwall  of  his  ij<=  ll  fra  Mertimes  1628  to 
Mertimes  1629  •  •  •  •  •  .  xx  ll 

Ite  fra  Johne  Crux  for  ye  anwall  of  his  twa  hundrethe  punds  fra  Witsonday 

1629  to  Mertimes  y'eftir  .  .  .  .  .  x  li 
Mair  fra  him  for  ye  anwall  rent  of  ane  vy""  j''  ll  fra  Mertimes  1629  to  Mertimes 

1630  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  (  ) 

Ite  fra  Gawin  Neisbit  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  his  fyve  hundrethe  punds  fra  Mer- 
times 1629  to  Mertimes  1630  .....  xlv  li 

Ite  fra  Johne  Reid  wry'  for  ye  anwall  of  his  iij=xxv  mks  fra  Mertimes  1629  to 
Mertimes  1630  .  .  .  .  .  .  xv  li 

Ite  fra  M^  Gawin  Hamiltoun  for  ye  anwall  of  his  iiij^  li  fra  Mertimes  1629  to 
Witsonday  1630  .  .  .  .  .  .  xx  li 

Ite  fra  Dauid  Pollok  for  ye  anwall  of  his  ij<=  mks  fra  Mertimes  1628  to  Mertimes 

1629  .....  xiij  ll  vij  s.  viij  d. 
Ite  ressavit  out  of  ye  box  .  .  .  .  .  1  li 
Ite  fra  Jo*  Rankeine  for  vmq"  Johne  Dicksone  hir  spous  legacie 

xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Ite  fra  Johne  Andersone  for  ye  anwall  of  his  hundrethe  mks  fra  Witsonday 

1630  to  Witsonday  1631  .  .  .  .  .  vj  ll 
Ite  fra  M''  James  Hamiltoun  for  vmq"  Marioun  Mwris  legacie 

Ixvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Ite  fra  W""  Neilsoun  lait  deaconvenar  for  ye  superplus  of  daillis  viij  li 

Ite  fra  Jo"  Lwf  for  ye  anwall  of  his  iiij"  mks  fra  Witsonday  1630  to  Witsonday 

1631  .......        xxiiij  t 

Ite  fra  Margaret  Sorrier  for  ye  legacie  of  vmq"  Johne  Cunygham  hir  spous    x  li 


Ite  ressavit  fra  ye  deaconis 
Ite  fra  ye  litsteris 
Ite  of  ye  auld  rentall 
Ite  with  ye  burges  silver 
Ite  for  ye  mort  clay's 


Suma  of  ye  haill  charge 


iclvj  ll 

vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xxxvj  li 

xiij  ll  vj  s. 

.    x  ll  xvj  s. 

(  ; 


Dischairge. 

In  ye  first  to  ye  pur  men  in  ye  hospitall    .  .  .  ,  j^lx  ll 

Ite  for  sevin  ells  of  clay'  to  be  sarks  to  Nicoll  Scot  at  vj  s.  viij  d.  the  ell 

xlvj  s.  viij  d. 
Ite  to  Androw  Allanesone  for  his  Hallowmes  pensioun  iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 


146 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1630 


Ite  to  M""  George  Sempill  for  ye  anwall  r'  of  his  thowsand  the  Mertimes  terme 
1629  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1  ll 


xlviij  s. 

iiij  ti  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xxvj  s.  viij  d. 


Ite  at  ye  delyuerie  y'of 

To  M''  Johne  Hutchesone  for  twa  seislg 

M''  to  his  man  for  parchment  yto 

Ite  to  WilHa  Calderwood  for  ane  pair  of  schoone 

Ite  for  sex  elHs  half  ell  half  quarter  of  blew  clay*  to  be  ane  goun  and  ane  pair 
of  hois  to  Simoun  Baird  and  ane  pair  of  hois  to  Nicoll  Scott  at  xiij  s.  ilk 
ell  is  .  .  .  .  .  .  xiij  ll  xviij  s. 

Ite  for  ye  making  yof  and  for  ye  auld  gowne  making  in  clay'  .  xl  s. 

Ite  to  James  Cauldwall  vpoun  warrand      .  .  .  .  v  ll 

Ite  to  Michaell  Rankein  vpoun  ane  warrand  .  .  .  Iviij  s. 

Ite  to  Ro'  Crawfurd  vpoun  ane  warrand    ....  xxx  s. 

Ite  to  ye  pur  men  of  augmenta'un  .  .  .  .  xij  li 

Ite  for  fyve  ellis  half  ell  of  gray  clay'  to  be  ane  stand  of  clay%  to  Barthilmow 
Mare  and  ane  cott  to  Johne  Dowglas  pryce  of  ye  ell  xxx  s.     .   viij  li  v  s. 

Ite  for  lyning  yto  .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Ite  to  Androw  Allanesone  for  his  Candilmes  paj-*  .      iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  for  making  of  ye  foirsds  clay%  of  Barthilmow  Mare  and  Johne  Dowglis 

xxvj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  for  aucht  ellis  of  claith  to  be  ane  pair  of  scheits  at  vj  s.  viij  d.  ye  ell  is 

Iv]  s.  viij  d. 

For  making  yof     .... 

To  Willia  Calderwood  vpoun  ane  warr^i 

Ite  for  ane  winding  scheit  to  vmqii  Ro'  Salmount 

Ite  for  ane  mort  kist  to  him 

For  drink  to  his  lykwalk    . 

Ite  to  ye  belmane 

Its  for  skouring  of  his  clay's 

Ite  to  James  Blair  at  his  entrie  to  ye  almoushous 

To  Gabriell  Smy'  for  ane  heck  to  ye  muskats 

Ite  for  claiths  to  ye  sd  James  Blair 

For  lyning  5^1:0  and  ane  pair  of  plading  hois 

To  Androw  Allanesone  for  his  Beltoun  quarter 

Ite  for  making  of  ye  sd  James  clay's 

Ite  to  Ro'  Mare  for  ane  drum 

For  trying  yof  to  Jo°  Jamesoune  . 

Ite  for  extracting  of  ye  legacies 

Ite  for  ane  pair  of  steming  hois  and  ane  pair  of  schoone  to  W™  Calderwood 

Iviij  s. 

Ite  to  Stephane  Rowane  for  ye  Witsonday  terme  of  ye  burso"' 

xxxiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Its  to  James  Lytlejohne  driimer  and  W"  Calderwood  on  ye  mwster  day   xij  s. 


xvj  d. 

xH 

xxx  s. 

xxxiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xij  s. 

xiiij  8. 

iiij  s. 

iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

xvj  s. 

V  ll  V  s. 

xlvij  s. 

iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

XX  s. 

X  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xij  s. 

xij  s. 

1630]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


147 


Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 

Ite 

Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 
Ite 

Ite 
Ite 
Ite 


to  Mr  George  Sempill  for  ye  Witsonday  fme  of  his  thowsand  punds      1 1l 
for  fo""  laids  of  lyme  and  leiding  yof     .  .  ,  xxix  s.  iiij  d. 

for  his  denner  at  ye  pay'  y^of  ....        xxiiij  s. 

to  Johne  Stirhng  saidler  at  directioun  of  Johne  Padie  and  Niniane  Andersone 

xH 
to  Johne  Ramsay  for  his  panis  anent  J01  Scott  and  Alex^  Vallance  hornyng 

xxiiij  s. 
for  furnishing  to  Ro*  Sahnount  in  tyme  of  his  seiknes 
to  Mitchell  Spens  vpoun  ae  band  .  .  xxxiij  ti 

to  Patrik  Geinill  vpoun  warrad 
to  James  Braidwood  clerk  for  his  pensioun 
for  sex  laids  sand 
for  ridling  and  making  ye  lyme 
for  fog 
for  sklait 


xxxu]  s. 
V)  s.  viij  d. 
x  tl 
xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
xvj  s. 
iiij  s. 
V  s. 
.  vj  s.  viij  d. 
ij  s. 
.    vj  II  XV  s. 
xxxiiij  s. 
XX  s. 
iij  ti  vj  s.  viij  d. 
xxvj  s.  viij  d. 
iiij  ll  viij  s. 
xxxij  s. 
vj  s. 
xxxiij  s.  iiij  d. 
xiiij  s. 
ye  chargis  bestowit  in  taking  and  giving  furth  ye  hospital!  rents 

iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 
for  peitis  and  coillis  at  seuerall  tymes  to  ye  pur  men  .  .  xij  ll 

for  stray  to  y^  beddis  ......  Iviij  s. 

for  dressing  of  ye  muskatis       .        •      .  .  .  xliiij  s.  viiij  d. 


for  naills 

for  clay's  to  Nicoll  Scott 

for  lynings  y^to 

for  making  yof 

to  Androw  Allane  for  his  Lambes  quarter 

to  William  Caldervvood  for  ane  pair  of  schoone 

for  poynting  of  ye  almoushous 

for  ane  winding  scheit  to  Simoun  Bard 

for  drink  to  ye  wark    . 

for  ane  kist      .... 

to  Willia  Bogill  belmane 


SuiTia  of  ye  discharge 
Sua  rest  de  claw 


v'^lxiij  ll  ij  s.  viij  d. 
Ivj  ll  xij  s.  vj  d. 


Qlk  sowme  of  fyftie  sex  punds  xij  s.  vj  d.  was  put  in  ye  box  and  qlk  with 
the  sowme  of  iiij  li  xij  s.  qlk  was  in  ye  sd  box  of  befoir  extendis  in  ye  haill  to 
ye  sowme  of  three  scoir  ane  pundis  vs.  Ite  ye  collecto''  gav  vp  ye  sowmes 
following  of  non  payments  qlk  was  gevin  to  ye  persouns  following  preceiding 
Mertimes  last  viz  Chairlis  Mowatt  xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  be  Macolme  Crawfurd 
ane  tmes  anwal  rent  extending  to  (  )  becaus  ye  band  is  not  sein 

it  is  vnknown,  be  Ezekiell    Montgomrie  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  Alex'  Campbell 
of  Barnwalloche  fourtie  pundis  money  Dauid  PoUok  xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d.  Johne 


148 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1630 


Forquhair  xvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  be  Willia  Cunynghame  xx  tl  qlk  compt  charge 
and  discharge  being  red  was  allowit  and  y^'foir  the  deacon  convenar  deaconis 
and  remanent  bretherine  pnt  dischargit  Willia  Neilsoun  last  deacone  convenar 
and  ye  sd  Johne  Ferrier  y'"of. 

The  qlk  day  M^  George  Sempills  and  Stephana  Rowanes  dischairges  ar  put 
in  ye  box  and  W"  Neilsoun  last  deacon  convenar  delyuerit  to  ye  deacon 
convenar  ye  bend  twa  mort  clay*  with  ye  gildrie  bulk. 

Andersoae.  The  Said  day  Ro'  Andersone  is  admitit  and  receavit  in  ye  almoushous 

to  remayne  y''in  in  \^mq"  Simon  Bairds  place  quha  maid  faith  to  keep  guid 
ordo"'. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  touk  out  of  ye  box  Johne  Forquharis 
band  and  Ires. 

7  De''  1630. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacon  convenar  deaconis  and  y"'  brethrine  being  con- 
venit  and  vnderstanding  that  Johne  Galbraithe  lau''  sone  to  Walter  Galbraith 
tailzo''  burges  of  yis  bru*  quhom  they  had  pntit  to  ye  prin"  and  regentis  of  ye 
college  of  ye  samynn  as  y"'  burso"'  to  remayne  yi'in  for  fo''  zeiris  efter  Michaelmes 
last  to  be  plaicit  within  ye  sd  college  as  ane  of  ye  townis  burso^'s  be  vertew  of 
y''  presenta'un  grantit  to  him  y^'vpoun  and  seing  y'  plaic  of  bursarie  vaikis 
yi'by  thairfoir  they  be  ye  tenno""  heirof  pntis  to  ye  said  prin"  and  regentis 
Francis  Kincaid  sone  law''  to  Niniane  Kinkaid  maltmane  and  (  ) 

Brock  sone  to  Thomas  Brock  cuik  burgess  of  ye  sd  bru'  to  be  admitit  and 
ressivit  to  ye  foirsd  plaice  of  bursarie  in  yis  maner  to  wit  the  sd  Francis  to  have 
ye  first  twa  zeirs  y^ol  and  ye  said  (  )  Brock  ye  last  twa  zeiris. 

Fischer.  The  sd  day  Artho''  Fischer  tailzo''  is  admittit  and  ressivit  in  the  craftis 

hospitall  to  be  sustenit  y''in  quha  mad  faith  to  keep  guid  ordo''. 


Act  in  favo's 
of  Kinkaid. 


Act  anent 
Cierk  and 
Winzetl 


XV  De'  1630. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacone  convenar  deaconis  and  remanent  bretherine 
convenit  vnderstanding  be  sufficient  proba^un  that  Patrik  Clerk  and  James 
Wingzit  weiferis  had  graitmikle  misbehavit  yamselfis  in  pns  of  Johne  Falconer 
y''  pnt  deacone  in  miscalling  and  opbrading  of  vy^'s  and  wald  nawayis  be  inhibet 
nor  dischairgit  and  ye  sd  James  for  casting  of  ane  cap  full  of  aill  at  ye  sd  Patrik 
thairfoir  they  vnlawit  ilk  ane  of  thame  in  ye  sowme  of  fo''  punds  to  be  imployit 
to  ye  vse  of  ye  puire  and  ordanis  thame  baith  to  giv  satisfactioun  at  ye  deacon 
convenaris  sight  and  if  they  or  ony  ane  of  thame  misbehavis  thamselfis  in 
pns  of  y'  deacon  pnt  or  to  cum  at  ony  tyme  heirefter  or  in  ony  place  q*suever 
ay''  be  word  or  deid  they  ar  ordanit  never  to  beir  any  kynd  of  office  in  ye  craft 
y''efter  the  samynn  being  tryit  befoir  ye  sd  deacone  convenar  and  deacos. 


1631]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  149 

Apud  Glasgow  decimo  quarto  Januarij  Anno  Domini  1631. 

The  qlk  day  Thomas  Bochannane  sone  law"  to  Johne  Bochannane  of  Prenteis 
Gilleistoun  is  bundin  and  buikit  preteis  with  Johne  Bochannane  baxter  during     °<^'>a""^''- 
ye  space  of  sevin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  tua  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to 
ye  indento''  producit  of  ye  dait  of  yir  pnts. 

Decimo  quito  Januarij  1631. 

The  qlk  day  Robert  Gray  sone  law"  to  vmq"  Harie  Gray  cordoner  is  bundin  Prenteis  Gray, 
prenteis  and  buikit  as  ane  prenteis  with  Walter  M<=Calla  cordoner  during  ye 
space  of  sevin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  yo. 
indentof  producit  of  the  dait  ye  twelf  day  of  August  1628  zeiris. 

xi  Februar  1631. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacone  convenar  deacones  and  most  p'  of  y^  counsall  Act  anent  3-e 
being  convenit  and  haifing  takin  to  y'  wys  consideia~uns  the  grait  abvse  vsit  ^''^''®"^- 
amongest  the  weiferis  of  this  bru'  zeirlie  in  electing  of  y''  deacone  in  respect 
of  ane  auld  and  evil  custome  vsit  amongest  thame  the  pnt  deacone  in  office 
at  ye  electioun  did  be  himself  alone  elect  and  choys  the  lyttis  of  thes  quha 
war  to  be  votit  to  be  deacone  qlk  hes  bein  ye  caus  of  grait  drinking  moles- 
tatioun  and  discord  amongest  [them]  tending  graitlie  to  ye  dishonour  of 
God  and  to  ye  grait  skandell  prejudice  and  hurt  of  the  most  p'  of  ye  haill 
bretherine  of  ye  calling,  for  remidie  q''of  they  did  statut  and  ordaine  with 
consent  of  Johne  Falconer  pnt  deacone  of  weiferis  and  most  p'  of  ye  maisteris 
of  craft  being  than  pnt  that  in  all  tymc  cuing  the  deacone  pnt  befoir  ye  electioun 
sail  have  libertie  onlie  to  mak  choys  of  three  persones  out  of  ye  tuelf  maisters 
of  ye  craft  and  ye  craft  sail  mak  choys  of  vy"^  three  out  of  the  sds  tuelf  persones 
ane  of  the  qlks  sex  personis  being  sua  choysin  sail  be  electit  deacone  zeirlie 
as  also  ye  deacone  being  sua  electit  he  sail  haif  libertie  to  choys  sex  maisteris 
out  of  ye  haill  bretherine  of  ye  calling  and  ye  craft  sail  choys  vy"'  sex. 

xxij  Fe"'  1 63 1. 

The  qlk  day  Johne  Gray  sone  law"  to  vmq"  Henrie  Gray  cordoner  is  Prenteis  Gray, 
buikit  as  ane  prenteis  with  Andro  Gray  cordoner  during  ye  space  of    fyve 
zeiris  conforme  to  ye  indento"^  producit  of  ye  dait  the  thrid  day  of  October 
1627  zeiris. 

xxiij  Marti j  1631. 

The  qlk  day  James  Crawfurd  sone  law"  to  vmq"  {  )  Crawfurd  Prenteis 

mariner  is  buikit  as  ane  prenteis  with  Willia  Glen  elder  baxter  during  ye  space  ^"■''"'*"'^'^- 
of  sevin  zeiris  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indento''  producit 
of  ye  dait  of  yir  pntis. 


150  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1631 


Prenteis 
Watsone 


Nono  Aprilis  1631. 
The  qlk  day  Ro*  Watsone  sone  law"  to  vmq"  Ro*  Watsoun  in  Cathcart 
is  buikit  prenteis  w*  Thomas  Cochrane  flescho'  for  sevin  zeiris  and  twa  zeirs 
for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indentof  daitit  ye  xxij  day  of  Marche  last. 


Vndecimo  Maij  1631. 
Anent  ye  puir.  The  qlk  day  the  deacone  convenar  deacones  and  y'  bretherine  being  con- 

venit  for  ye  tyme  in  y^  hospitall  ordanis  y^  collector  to  giv  to  ilk  ane  of  y^ 
pur  men  y''in  fourtie  schiUingis  mair  nor  y'  ordinar  waigis. 


Andersonis 
corslat 

Biggart  and 

Fawsydis 

muskattis. 


Gemmill. 


Prenteis 
Gibsoun. 


Prenteis 
Bowmane. 


Decimo  nono  Augustj  1631. 
The  qlk  day  Johne  Andersone  being  new  elect  deacon  convenar  at 
Michaelmes  last  gav  in  his  corslat  with  held  peis  to  remajTie  in  ye  crafts 
hospitall  conforme  to  ye  act  maid  yi'anent  and  also  Johne  Biggart  being  yis 
zeir  new  electit  deacone  to  ye  skynneris  and  Willia  Fauwsyd  to  ye  baxters 
gav  in  y""  muskatis  w'  bandalieris  conforme  to  ye  tenno''  of  ye  sd  act. 

Octatio  Septemhris  1631. 
The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  ye  deaconis  and  y''  bretherine  being 
convenit  in  ye  New  Kirk  admitit  and  ressivit  Patrik  Gemill  elder  skj-nner  w'in 
yf  hospitall  to  be  internit  y^'in  wt  ye  rest  of  ye  pur  men  w*in  ye  samye  conforme 
to  vse  and  wont. 

Duodecimo  Septemhris  1631. 
The  qlk  day  Ro'  Gibsone  sone  to  Johne  Gibsoun  in    Paislay  is  buikit 
heirin  as  prenteis  with  Johne  Jafra  hamermane  to  serve  him  conforme  to  ye 
indentof  of  ye  dait  ye  (  ). 

Tertio  Octohris  1631. 

The  said  day  Willia  Bowmane  sone  law"  to  Willia  Bowmane  burges  of 
Rutherglen  is  buikit  prenteis  to  George  Patersone  weifer  to  serve  him  as  prenteis 
sevin  zeirs  conforme  to  ye  indento"'  of  ye  dait  ye  xxj  day  of  March  last. 

Duodecimo  Oc"'  1631. 
The  qlk  day  Johne  Andersone  pnt  deacone  convenar  being  convenit 
with  ye  deaconis  and  y''  bretherine  of  counsell  for  ye  electing  of  twa  personis 
to  be  presentit  with  ye  sd  deacon  convenar  to  ye  provest  baiUeis  and  counsall 
to  ye  effect  ane  of  tham  may  be  electit  and  choysin  be  thame  to  be  deacone 
convenar  for  the  zeir  to  cum  be  pluralitie  of  votis  they  electit  and  nominat 
Niniane  Andersone  cordoner  and  Gawin  Neisbit  zounger  tailzo'  to  be  presentit 
as  sd  is  to  ye  effect  foirsaid  and  that  be  Willia  Howie  and  Thomas  Gray. 
Thairefter  the  sd  Johne  Andersone  is  electit  and  continwit  deacone  convenar 
for  the  zeir  to  cum. 


1631]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


151 


A  pud  Glasgow  decimo  no  no  Odobris  1631. 

The  said  day  Johne  Andersone  deacon  convenar  elect  yir  personis  following 
to  be  his  csallo's  for  the  zeir  to  cum  and  first  the  deaconis  as  foUowis. 


Johne  Duncane 
Johne  Andersone 
Adame  Tod 
Johne  Biggart 
Willia  Fawsyd 
Patrik  Clerk 
Johne  Boyd 


Rot  Pollok 
Ro'  Mwre 
Niniane  Gilhagie 
Androw  Mylne 
James  Watsoun 
Willia  Brownsyd 
David  Jack 


Walter  Dowglas  baillie 


Gabriell  Smy* 
Johne  Kirkwood 
Artho'  Tackatis 
Niniane  Andersone 
Richart  Allane 
Johne  Wilsoun 
Willia  Andersone 
James  Flemyng 
Gawin  Neisbit  elder 
Gawin  Neisbit  zounger 
Johne  Mwre 
Ro*  Horner 
Manasses  Lyll 
Johne  Love 
Ro*  Andersone 
Thomas  Scott 
Thomas  Fawsyd  elder 


James  Robesone 

James  Gray 

Johne  Stewart 

Thomas  Morsoun 

Ro*  Snyp 

Patrik  Colquhoun 

Johne  Baird 

Willia  Neilsoun  elder 

Willia  Neilsoun  zounger 

Johne  Crawfurd 

Thomas  Gray 

Ro'  Patersone 

Johne  Thomesone 

Johne  Hall 

Patrik  Watsoun 

Alex''  Colquhoun 

George  Mwre 

James  Symsone 

\Vm  Howie 

Johne  M'^Ewin 


The  said  day  the  saidis  deacon  convenar  deaconis  and  remanent  personis 
foirsd  elect  Niniane  Andersone  Willia  Howie  Gawin  Neisbit  zounger  and  Niniane 
Gilhagie  to  be  fo^  men  for  thame  to  be  vpoun  the  deane  of  gilds  csall  for  ye 
zeir  to  cum  conforme  to  ye  Ire  of  gildrie. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacone  convenar  deaconis  and  maist  p*  of  y'  brethereine 
being  convenit  to  heir  Ro*  Horner  y^  collecto'  his  compt  of  his  intromissioun 
w*  ye  guids  and  geir  perteining  to  ye  poor  of  ye  craftis  hospitall  for  ye  tmes 


152 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1631 


xlH 

xxix  I1 

chiritie 

xii]  ti  ij  s.  viij  d. 

xlH 

liij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

vj  1i  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

XV  ll 

XXX  ll 

xlv  H 

xij  ll 

of  Mertimes  in  ano  1630  zeir  to  this  day  he  producit  his  compt  as  follows  and 
chargit  himself  in  maner  \Tider\vryttin  viz  : 

Item  ressavit  be  him  fra  Ezekill  Montgomrie  for  ye  anuall  of  for  hundrethe 
marks  fra  Mertimes  in  ano  1629  to  Mertimes  1630     xxvj  li  xiij  s.  liij  d. 

Ite  fra  M"'  Gawin  HamUtoun 

Ite  fra  Willia  Cunj^nghame 

Ite  fra  Jo°  Maxwall  merchand  qlk  he  gav  for 

Ite  fra  Alex^  Campbell 

Ite  fra  ^^'illia  Howie  and  Androw  MwTe    . 

Ite  fra  Dauid  PoUok 

Ite  fra  Johne  Reid 

Ite  fra  Macolme  Crawford 

Ite  fra  Gawin  Neisbit 

Ite  fra  Jo"  Love    .... 

Ite  fra  Ro*  Hamiltoun  carter  in  compleit  pay*  of  all  byganis  of  ane  anuel  rent 
awin  to  thame  out  of  ane  hous  in  Briggait  pertenyng  to  Androw  Haddowe 

vij  ll  vj  s.  vii]  d. 

Ite  fra  George  MwTe  mariner  qlk  he  gave  for  chiritie  .  .    v  li  xvj  s. 

Ite  fra  ye  deaconis  ......         j'^lvj  ll 

Ite  fra  ye  deacone  convenar  himself  qlk  was  awin  be  ane  band 

Ixvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  fra  Mathow  Ker  conforme  to  ye  rentall  .  .  .       xxxvj  ll 

Ite  fra  James  Wood  in  compleit  pay*  of  all  byrwnis  anwalls  awin  out  of  vmq" 
M'  George  Clydsdaill  hous  in  Saltmercat  preceiding  Witsonday  last 

xiiij  ll  X  s. 

Ite  fra  Johne  Forquhar      ....  xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  fra  W™  Howie  for  ye  new  burgess 

Ite  for  ye  mort  claj'*s 

Ite  left  in  ye  box  at  ye  last  compt 

SuiTia 


xxiiij  ll  xviij  s.  ij  d. 

XX  li  xiij  s. 

Ixj  t  v  s. 

vij'^xxxvij  ll  iiij  s.  x  d. 


Dischairge. 

Ite  in  ye  first  to  Stephane  Rowane  collector  to  ye  college  for  M^  Jo°  Howisouns 
burso''  .....  Ixvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  fo  ane  pair  of  scheitis  to  Ro'  Andersone 
Ite  for  ane  mort  kist  to  ane  of  ye  poore  men 
Ite  for  ane  winding  scheit  to  him 
Ite  for  ane  pair  of  scheits  to  Artho'  Fischer 
Ite  for  ane  pair  to  Jo°  Dowglas     . 
Mair  for  ane  covering  to  his  bed    . 
Ite  for  ye  sewing  and  heming  of  ye  saids  scheitis 
Ite  for  ane  threif  of  stray 


lix  s.  vj  d. 

xxxvj  s. 

xxvij  s. 

Ivj  s.  viij  d. 

Ivj  s.  viij  d. 

xxx  s. 

iiij  s. 

xs. 

1631]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


153 


xij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

vj  ll  vij  s.  vj  d. 

iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 


XXIX  s. 


iiij  d- 
j<=  ll 

iij  d. 
iiij  d. 

xij  s. 


Ite  for  coills  and  peits  for  ye  haill  zeir 

Ite  for  clay's  to  Artho"'  Fischer 

Ite  for  clayt  to  Ro'  Andersone 

Ite  for  lynings  to  Artho''  Fischeris  clay's 

Ite  to  M"^  George  Sempill  . 

Ite  spent  with  him  at  twa  seuerall  tymes  quhen  he  gat  his  moey 

vj  ll  vj  s 
Ite  for  lyning  to  Ro'  Andersone  his  cott    .  .  .  xiij  s. 

Ite  to  ane  pur  womane  at  ye  deacone  convenars  cmand   . 
Ite  spent  at  ye  recept  of  mo«y»  fra  W""  Cunynghame  and  Ezekiell  Montgomrie 

viij  s. 
Ite  for  mending  of  Artho''  Fischeris  bed  and  for  ane  lock  y'to  x  s. 

Ite  to  Mathow  Ker  to  by  shois      ....  xxvj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  to  W™  Caldervvood  to  by  schoone         .  .  .  xxvj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  to  vmq'i  Symon  Baird  his  wyf  at  cmand  of  ye  deacon  convenar         xxix  s. 
Ite  to  Jo°  Neill  conforme  to  ane  warrand  .  .  .        xlviij  s. 

Ite  to  Johne  Grahame  at  twa  seuerall  tymes  at  cmand  of  ye  deacone  convenare 

xxxvj  s. 
Ite   to    Ro'   Fischer    conforme    to    ane   warrand  .         iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  to  Androw  Allanesone  conforme  to  ane  warrand  at  fo''  seuerall  tymes 

xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Ite  to  W""  Calderwood  conforme  to  ane  warrand  .  .     vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  to  Johne  Auldcorne  at  three  seuerall  tymes  conforme  to  ane  warrand      x  ll 
Ite  to  W""  Kirkland  at  twa  seuerall  tymes  conforme  to  ane  warrand 

Ite  for  oyll  to  ye  muscattis 

Ite  for  ane  pair  of  hois  to  Lawrence  Shaw 

Ite  to  Jo°  Dalrimpill  .... 

Ite  to  W"  Witherspone  hamermane 

Ite  for  ane  pair  of  scheitis  to  NicoU  Scott 

Ite  to  ye  poore  men  in  ye  hospitall  in  augmenta'un 

Ite  to  At^  Reid  conforme  to  ane  warrand 

Ite  for  scheitts  to  La  wrens  Shaw  . 

Mair  for  ane  riddell  .... 

Ite  for  ane  vy"'  pair  of  schoone  to  W"'  Calderwood 

Ite  ane  pair  of  scheitis  to  Barthilmow  Mare 

Ite  for  ane  sark  to  Nicoll  Scott 

Ite  to  James  Cauldwall      .... 

Ite  to  Johne  Stirling  saidler  conforme  to  ane  warrand 

Ite  to  W°»  Calderwood       .... 

Ite  to  Patrik  Gemill  .... 

Ite  for  ane  pair  of  breicliis  to  Ro'  Andersone 

Ite  to  ye  sex  puir  men  in  ye  hospitall 


vj 

ll 

xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

vnj  s. 

XX  s. 

Iviij  s. 

xij  s. 

Iviij  s. 

xij  ll 

.    xii] 

ll 

vjs 

.  viij  d. 

Iviij  s. 

iiij  s. 

xxvj 

ll 

[?s. 

viij  d. 
Iviij  s. 
xxij  s. 
Iviij  s. 

XX  ll 

vj 

H 

xiij  £ 

.  iiij  d. 
xxix  s. 

Iij 

s.  vj  d. 
jclxll 

154 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1631 


Flemyng 
collecto'. 


Litsteris 


Zair  dark 

Ccilderwood 

offi'. 


Prenteis 
Duncane. 


Ite  to  Ro'  Crawfurd  conforme  to  ane  warrand 
Ite  spent  w'  M''  George  Sempill 
Ite  for  hois  to  NicoU  Scott 
Ite  to  W"^  Zair  for  his  fie 

Suiiia 

Sua  restis  in  the  comptaris  hand 


iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

xxiiij  s. 

xxij  s.  vj  d. 

.    xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

v<=xiij  ll  X  s. 

ij=xxiij  ll  xiiij  s.  x  d. 


Of  ye  qlk  sowme  he  producit  ane  band  grantit  be  \V™  Andersone  cordoner 
and  his  cau''s  of  ane  hundrethe  markis  q''of  he  onlie  debursit  three  scoir  punds 
and  producit  in  mo^  ane  hunderthe  three  scoir  three  punds  xiiij  s.  qlk  with 
ye  said  band  of  Willia  Andersonis  was  put  in  ye  box  and  ye  nixt  collecto'' 
to  be  chargit  y'with  and  ye  haiU  deaconis  pnt  and  y^  bretherine  exonerit  and 
dischargit  ye  sd  Ro'  Horner  of  his  intromissioun  w'  y^  guids  the  zeir  last 
bypast. 

Menwrand  of  dnwal  rents  to  he  payit  at  Mertimes  nixt  to  cu. 

Willia  Cunynghame  x  ll  Chairlis  Mowatt  liij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d.  Macolme 
Crawfurd   xv  ll    Dauid    Pollok    (  )    Alex'   Campbell   xl  ll   Willia 

Crux  XX  ll  W"  Howie  Androw  M'  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  M''  Gawin  Hamiltoun 
XX  ll  be  ye  Laird  of  SilvertounhiU  Ixxv  ll  Johne  Forquhair  xxv  maks  Ezekiell 
Montgomrie  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

The  said  day  be  pluralitie  of  votis  James  Flemyng  cordoner  is  elect  and 
choysin  collecto''  for  ye  zeir  to  cu  quha  being  pnt  acceptit  ye  sd  office  in  and 
vpoun  him  and  gav  his  ay'  de  ftdeli  administra' ne  y'in. 

Memorand  the  sd  new  collector  ressa\-it  fra  Willia  Howie  ten  marks  for 
ye  litsteris  quarteris  compts. 

Decimo  sexto  No'''  1631. 

The  said  day  Willia  Zair  is  admitit  and  ressavit  dark  for  ane  zeir  to  cu 
and  Wn*  Calderwood  continuit  offi''  during  ye  said  space  quha  being  pnt  gav 
y^  ay's  as  effeirit. 

xxviij  No'  1 63 1. 

The  said  daj-  James  Duncane  law"  sone  to  Ro'  Duncane  in  Bankwood 
is  bundin  prenteis  w'  Johne  Duncane  bras  smy'  during  sevin  zeiris  conforme 
to  ye  indento'  of  ye  dait  ye  fourt  day  of  May  last. 


Decimo  qufto  Fehruarij  1632. 

h'^^^^'taii'^ '"  "^^^  ^^'^  "^^y  ^^^  deacon  convenar  deacones  and  y'  bretherine  ordanis 

Ro'  Crawfurd  maltman  to  be  admitit  and    placit  w'in  ye  hospital!  and  y' 


1632]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  155 

internit  as  ane  of  y^  ordinar  sex  men  and  ordanis  James  Camerone  to  half 
his  quarter  payment  qlk  the  sd  Ro'  had  grantit  to  him  of  befoir. 

The  said  day  ordanis  the  collector  to  mak  three  new  gownis  to  three  puir  Puir  men. 
men  in  ye  hospitall  and  ordanis  the  haill  sex  men  y^in  to  weir  y''  gownis  con- 
forme  to  ye  ordo^  or  then  to  remove  thamself  out  of  ye  hospitall. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  haill  deaconis  and  thair  bretherin  Act  in  favo's 
pnt  having  taking  to  y^  considera~uns  ye  petitioun  gevin  in  befoir  thame  °  ^^ 
be  Johne  Baird  wry'  makand  mentioun  that  he  was  cau''  to  yame  for  Johne 
Reid  v\Ty'  for  twa  hundrethe  twentie  fyve  markis  and  that  y''  is  xxv  maks 
of  anwal  rent  y'of  awan  preceiding  Mertimes  last  and  now  ye  sd  Johne  Reid 
hes  fled  ye  cuntrey  for  debt  and  hes  left  ye  said  Johne  Baird  in  grait  distres 
for  that  and  maney  mae  sowmes  lykas  he  hes  his  awn  burding,  and  they  having 
had  knawledge  y^oi  they  all  in  ane  voce  gave  downe  to  him  all  bygane  anwal 
rents  of  ye  sd  prin"  sowme  restand  awin  vnpayit  for  ye  Mertimes  tme  last 
and  all  !mes  preceiding  and  als  twentie  fyve  makis  of  the  sd  prin"  sowme 
provyding  that  ye  sd  Johne  Bard  mak  thankfuU  pay'  to  y^  collecto"'  of  ye 
sowme  of  twa  hundrethe  maks  mo^y  at  Beltoun  nixt  to  cu  vtherwayis  to  giv 
ane  band  w'  sufficient  cau^is  for  twa  hundrethe  and  twentie  marks  to  be  payit 
at  Mertimes  nixt  to  cu  and  als  he  payand  at  Beltoun  nixt  ye  sowme  of  fo'' 
pund  mo^y  qlk  is  debursit  for  regra~un  of  ye  auld  band  and  raising  Ires  y^vpoun 
and  failzeing  in  performing  the  premiss  this  act  to  be  null. 

Nono  Maij  1632. 
The  said  day  the  deacon  convenar  deacones  and  y  bretherin  ordanis  that  Hous  and 
ye  land  and  zaird  narrest  to  y^  hospitall  be  bo'  fra  Alex'  Steuart  and  appropriat  ^^^     ^'°°' 
to  y''  vse  and  to  y'  effect  ordanis  y'  collector  to  vplift  fra  Willia  Cunynghame 
ye  three  hundrethe  marks  that    he  is  adebtit  and    fra  Johne  Love  his  twa 
hundrethe  makis  mo^y. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  reportit  that  Johne  Baird  wry'  had  Baird. 
gevin  him  his  twa  hundrethe  mk  and  y''foir  they  discharge  ye  fo''  punds  for 
ye  Ires  and  ordanis  him  to  have  ane  assigna'un  to  ye  haill  band. 

The  said  day  ordanis  ye  deaconis  of  ye  tailzo''s  cordoneris  and  bonnet- 
makeris  to  produce  y"'  muskatts  yis  day  aught  dayis  vnder  ye  paine  of  fyve 
punds  by  and  atto''  ye  muskatts. 

xvj  Maij  1632. 
The  sd  day  the  deacone  convenar  deaconis  and  y''  bretherine  hes  con-  Naper. 
dischendit  to  len  Johne  Naper  ane  hundrethe  marks  mo<^y  vpoun  his  lands. 

The  said  day  Johne  Andersone  deacon  of  cordoner  gave  in  his  muscatt  Muscattis. 
w'  staf  and  baudaleirs  to  be  keepit  in  ye  hospitall  conforme  to  ye  ordo''. 


156 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1632 


Gevin  in  to  ye  The  Said  day  the  deacon  of  ye  bonnetmakeris  gav  in  his  muscat  with  staf 

°^'"     ■         and  bandaleiris. 

Duodecimo  Junij  1632. 

The  said  day  Johne  Finlay  law'i  broy  to  Patrik  Finlay  in  Kirkintilloche 
is  buikit  heirin  as  prenteis  to  serve  Gilbert  Scheirer  maltmane  during  ye  space 
of  fj've  zeirs  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indento'f  producit 
of  the  dait  the  sevintein  day  of  Marche  last. 


Prenteis 

Finlay. 


Muskatis 
gevin  in. 


Collecto'. 


xxij  of  August  1632. 

The  said  day  Adame  Tod  deacone  of  ye  tailzo's  and  Dauid  Jack  visito' 
of  ye  gairdneris  gav  in  y''  muskatts  bandaleiris  and  staflfts  qlkis  war  hung  vp 
with  ye  rest. 

The  said  day  ordanis  ye  collector  to  furnish  bed  clay's  and  ane  gowne 
to  Robert  Crawfurd. 


Act  aganst 
Fischer. 


The  samynn  day  the  deacone  convenar  and  deaconis  ordanis  Artho^ 
Fischer  quha  for  ye  pnt  hes  place  in  y''  hospitall  ay''  to  weir  his  gowne  or  yen 
they  ordane  Johne  Smy*  tailzo"'  to  haif  his  place. 


Prenteis 
Bocbannane. 


xxj  of  Septembris  1632. 

The  said  daj'  Walter  Bochannane  sone  law"  to  James  Bochannane 
induellar  w'in  yis  bru'  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Walter  Bochannane  baxter 
to  serue  him  as  prenteis  during  ye  zeiris  contenit  in  ye  indento''  maid  betuixt 
yame  qlk  is  of  ye  dait  of  yir  puts. 


Ninian 
Anderson 
d.  conveener. 


Decimo  Octobris  1632. 

The  quhilk  day  Johne  Andersone  bailzie  lait  deacon  convenar  the  deacones 
and  y''  bretherine  being  convenit  for  ye  electing  of  three  of  y^  number  to  be 
pntit  to  ye  provest  bailleis  and  csall  to  ye  effect  ane  of  thame  may  be  admitit 
and  ressavit  deacon  convenar  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  be  pluralitie  of  voitis  they 
did  elect  Niniane  Andersone  cordoner  Willia  Howie  litster  and  Niniane  Gilhagie 
maltman  to  be  pntit  to  yame  to  ye  effect  foirsd  and  ordanis  Manasses  Lyll 
to  pnt  ye  lyttis.  Thairefter  ye  sd  Niniane  Andersone  is  admittit  deacon 
convenar  for  yis  zeir  to  cum. 

xj  Octobris  1632. 

The  qlk  day  the  said  deacone  conveinar  and  his  bretherine  did  elect  yir 
personis  following  being  four  in  nwmber  to  sit  w'  ye  deane  of  gild  vpoun  his 
csall  for  thame  for  ye  zeii  to  cu  viz  W'alter  Dowglas  Willia  Howie  Gawin  Neisbit 
zounger  Willia  Andorsene. 


1632]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


157 


Apiid  Glasgow  Septimo  Novembris  1632. 

The  qlk  day   Niniane   Andersone  deacon   convenar  electit   the  personis 
following  to  be  vpoun  his  csall  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  and  first  the  deacon  as  followis. 


Deaconis 


Johne  Kirkwood 
Richart  Allane 
Johne  Mwre 
Johne  Love 
James  Robesone 
Johne  Falconer 
James  Scheillis  elder 


James  Rankein 
Ro'  Bell 

Niniane  Gilhagie 
Androw  Mylne 
Alex""  Colquhoun 
Willia  Brownsyd 
Dauid  Jack 


Followis  the  rest. 


Johne  Andersone  baillie 


Johne  Duncane  elder 
Gabriell  Smy' 
Artho''  Tackats 
Henrie  Robesone 
Johne  Andersone 
Johne  Wilsone 
Willia  Andersone 
James  Flemyng 
Willia  Coittis 
Gawin  Neisbit  elder 
Gawin  Neisbit  zounger 
Adame  Tod 
Rot  Horner 
Johne  Biggart 
Manasses  Lyill 
Ro'  Andersone 
Thomas  Fawsyd  elder 
Thomas  Scott 


James  Gray 
Johne  Boyd 
Thomas  Morsone 
Ro'  Pollok 
Patrik  Colquhoun 
Johne  Baird 
Ro'  Mwre 
Walter  Dowglas 
Willia  Neilsoun  elder 
Willia  Neilsoun  zog^ 
Johne  Crawfurd 
Thomas  Gray 
Rot  Patersone 
Johne  Thomesone 
Johne  Hall 
Patrik  Watsone  elder 
Rot  Watsone  elder 
George  Mwre 
Wm  Howie 
Johne  M^Ewin 
Thomas  Atchesone 


The  said  day  the  said  Thomas  Scott  baxter  is  be  pluralitie  of  voitis  electit 
coUecto"'  for  ye  zeir  to  cum  and  ordas  him  to  be  waLrnit  to  ye  sd  court  to  accept 
and  giv  his  ay'. 


158  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1632 

Penultimo  No"'  1632. 
CoUecto'.  The  said  day  Thomas  Scott  baxter  being  of  befoir  electit  collector  for  ye 

zeir  eschewing  acceptit    ye  samj-nn  in  and  vpoun  him  and  gav  his  ay'    de 
fiddi  adminisira'ne  y'in. 

The  said  day  James  Flemyng  lait  collecto''  maid  his  compt  anent  his 
intromissioun  with  ye  guids  pertenyng  to  ye  hospitall  and  pur  y^in  the  deacone 
convenar  deacone  and  most  pairt  of  y''  bretherine  being  pnt  q'of  chairge  and 

dischairge  foUowis. 

Chairge. 

In  ye  first  ressavit  fra  Willia  Howie  for  ye  litsters  quarter  comptis 

vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  fra  Macolme  Crawfurd  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  his  fyve  hundrethe  maks  for 

Mertimes  and  preceiding  .  .  .  .  .  xv  li 

Ite  fra  Dauid  Pollok  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  his  mo^^y  preceiding  Mertimes  last 

xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Ite  fra  ye  Laird  of  SilvertounhiU   .....         Ixxv  li 

Ite  fra  M''  Gawin  Hamiltoun  for  ye  anwalls  of  his  mo^v  to  Mertimes  last     xl  ll 
Ite  fra  Alex''  Campbell  for  ye  anwall  of  his  mo^v  to  ye  sd  tme  xl  li 

Ite  ressavit  fra  Chairlis  Mowatt  for  ye  bygaine  anwaUis  of  his  fof  hundrethe 
marks  preceiding  Mertimes  1631  .  .  .     Iiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  fra  Niniane  Andersone  in  name  of  Johne  Forquhair     .  xvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Ite  fra  Johne  Allane  of  legacie       ....  Iiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  fra  Willia  Howie  and  Androw  Mwre  for  anwal  rent  to  Mertimes  last 

Iiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Ite  fra  Johne  Zoung  as  legacie  left  be  vmq"  Thomas  Zoung  his  father  x  li  iij  s. 
Ite  fra  W"  Cunynghame  of  anwal  rent      .  .  .  .  xx  li 

Ite  fra  Gawin  Neisbit  of  anwal  rent  ....  xlv  ll 

Ite  fra  Ezekiell  Montgomrie  anwall  .  .  .  .  xl  ll 

Ite  fra  Johne  Love  of  anwall  .....        xxiiij  ll 

Ite  fra  ye  ex'''^  of  vmq"  Patrik  Monteithe  as  legacie  .  .  xxx  li 

Ite  fra  ye  deaconis  .  .  .  .  .  .  j<^lx  ll 

Ite  fra  Johne  Baird  of  debt  .  .  .  j'^xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 


Ite  left  in  ye  box  at  ye  making  of  j-e  last  compt 

Ite  fra  Chairlis  Mowat  for  expenss  of  Ires 

Ite  gottin  fra  burgess 

Ite  gottin  for  ye  mort  clay's 


j'^lxiij  ll  xiiij  s. 

iiij  ll 

xxxiiij  li  xij  s. 

xix  li  vij  s. 


Mair  of  superplus  of  ye  daills         .  .  .  xxvij  ll  iiij  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  ressavit  fra  Mathow  Ker  for  ye  auld  rentall     .  .  .  xl  li 

Ite  fra  M''  George  Sempill  .  .  .  .  .      x  ll  iij  s. 

Ite  fra  S''  Thomas  Boyd  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  W™  Crux  money 

xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Suiiia    of    j-e    haill    chairge    is  .         j*Jj<=iiij  ll  iij  s.  viij  d. 


1632]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


159 


. 

XXIX  s. 

. 

Iviij  s. 

xiij  ll  vj  s. 

viij  d. 

xiij  tl  vj  s. 

viij  d. 

xiij  tl  vj  s. 

viij  d. 

xiij  li  vj  s. 

viij  d. 

( 

) 

Dischairge. 

In  ye  first  for  ye  haill  collis  furnishit  to  ye  hous  fra  Michaelmas  1631  to  Michael- 
mes  last  ......    xiij  ll  xiiij  s.  ij  d. 

Ite  to  Ro'  SprewU  mariner 

Ite  to  Ro'  Horner 

Ite  to  Andrew  Allaesone    . 

Ite  to  Johne  Auldcorne 

To  Willia  Kirkland 

Ite  to  Johne  Smy' 

Ite  to  Ro'  Crawfurd 

Ite  to  James  Calmeroun    .  .  .  .  .  xij  I1  xviij  s. 

Ite  to  ye  college  collecto''  for  ye  bursar      .  .  Ixvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  debursit  to  mak  vp  ane  sowme  lent  out  .  .  .  xl  li 

Ite  for  ane  pair  of  schois  to  VV"  Calderwood  .  .  .         xxvj  s. 

Ite  debursit  for  raising  of  Ires        .....  viij  li 

Ite  for  ane  covering  to  Bartie  Mwre  ....        xxxvj  s. 

Mair  for  ane  covering  to  Lawrie  Schaw      ....        xxxvj  s. 

Ite  to  James  Neilsone        .  .  .  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Ite  for  ye  sewing  of  ye  sds  twa  covering    ....  iiij  s. 

Ite  for  making  and  furnishing  of  Willia  Calderwood  clay's       viij  li  xix  s.  x  d. 

Ite  for  ane  stand  of  clay's  to  Bartie  Mwre  ane  pair  of  breichis  and  hois  to 
NicoU  Scott  and  ane  pair  of  hois  to  Arthor  Fischer      xxxiiij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 


Ite  for  making  of  Bartie  Mwris  clay'  and  his  goun 

Ite  for  making  of  Nicoll  Scottis  breichis  and  his  hois 

Ite  for  making  of  ane  vy""  pair  of  hois 

Ite  for  three  quarteris  hardin  to  ye  coverings 

Ite  for  lyning  to  Nicoll  Scotts  clay's 

Ite  for  strae  to  y'  bedds  .... 

Ite  to  James  Cuthbert  bonnetmaker  conforme  to  ane  warrand 

Ite  for  clay'  to  be  ane  pair  of  hois  to  Ro'  Andersone 

Mair  for  making  of  yame  ..... 

Ite  to  Dauid  Wilsone  cowper  conforme  to  ane  warrand 

Ite  to  Willia  Wotherspone 

Mair  for  ane  tow  to  ye  bell 

Ite  lent  out  to  Chairlis  Pollok 

Ite  to  Gabriell  Smy'  for  cleiks 

Ite  for  ane  staf  to  hing  ye  bell  on 

Ite  to  James  Lytle  for  his  service  as  ane  driimer  at  ye  muster  day 

Ite  to  Ro'  Myllar  maltmane  conforme  to  ane  warrand 

Mair  to  W"  Calderwood  for  dichting  of  ye  muscatts 

Ite  for  twa  gownis  to  Ro'  Crawfurd  and  Artho''  Fischer 

Mair  for  making  of  yame  ..... 


xlvj  s. 

xij  s. 

ij  s. 

iiij  s. 

XX  s. 

XX  s. 

viij  li 

xix  s. 

ij  s. 

xH 

xij  s. 

vj  s. 

l.xvj  li  xiiij  s. 

vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

iij  s.  iiij  d. 

Iviij  s. 

xll 

.xij  s. 

xxj  ll  x  s. 

iij  ll 


xls. 

iij  s.  viij  d. 

iij  %  vj  s.  viij  d. 

.   iij  li  iiij  s. 

xxxij  s. 

lill  zeir  . 

jt^lxU 

i6o  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1632 

Ite  for  ane  covering  to  Ro*  Crawfurd 

Mair  for  hardin  y^'to  and  making  y''of 

Ite  for  ane  gray  cott  to  Ro'  Crawfurd 

Mair  for  ane  pair  of  scheitis  to  him 

Ite  for  ane  sark  to  Nicoll  Scott 

Ite  gevin  to  ye  puir  men  in  ye  hous  ye  haill  zeir 

Ite  to  ye  deacone  convenar  and  Gawin  Neisbit  zounger  quhen  they  went  to 

Paislay  to  pay  M^  George  Sempill        ....  iiij  li 

Ite  spent  y'  day  the  sd  M"'  George  was  bureit        .  .  .   vj  ll  xv  s. 

Ite  to  Gabriell  Smy'  for  lockis  .....  xviij  s. 
Ite  to  Mathow  Ker  for  ane  pair  of  schois  .  .  xxvj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  debursit  to  ye  sd  M^  George  Sempill  befoir  his  deceis  for  ye  anwal  of  his 

mo^y  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  jc  ll 

Ite  to  Willia  Zair  for  his  fiall         ....    xiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Suriia  of  ye  haill  dischairge  is  .  vj^lxxxiiij  ll  xvij  s. 

Sua  restis      ....  iiij  "^xix  li  vj  s.  %aij  d. 

Of  ye  qlk  so\\Tiie  he  producit  ane  band  grantit  be  Chairlis  PoUok  and  his 
caul's  for  twa  hundrethe  punds  and  producit  in  mo^y  iji'xix  li  vj  s.  viij  d.  qlk 
with  ye  sd  bands  was  put  in  ye  box  and  ye  nixt  coUecto''  to  be  chairgit  y^'w' 
and  ye  haill  deaconis  pnt  and  y^  bretherine  exonerit  and  dischargit  ye  sd  James 
Flemyng  of  his  intromissiou. 

h^^'taiL  "^^^  ^^^"^  '^^y  Johne  Smy'  tailzo''  is  admitit  to  remayne  within  ye  hospitall 

and  ordanis  him  to  be  intertenit  y'"in  as  ane  of  y^  se.x  men. 

Sexio  Februarij  1633. 

Prenteis  Stein.  The  said  day  Ro*  Stein  law"  sone  to  Johne  Stein  in  Blachame  is  buikit 

heirin  as  prenteis  to  Willia  Dobbie  weifer  during  ye  space  of  sevin  zeiris  as 
prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indento''  of  ye  dait  ye 
first  day  of  Februar  instant. 

Vigeo  primo  August]  1633. 

For  help  of  The  qlk  day  the  deacon  convenar  deaconis  and  y^  csall  ordanis  Thomas 

jifatbem  fut.     Scott  y''  collecto''  to  giv  for  ye  helping    to  ye  bulding  of  ane  new  brig  over 
Netham  fut  twentie  markis  mo^y. 

s'h  ^f^"'*  "^^^  ^^''^  ^^y  ^^^  deacone  convenar  most  p'  of  the  deaconis  and  y''  csall 

hes  gevin  and  grantit  to  Patrik  Scheillis  sone  law"  to  James  ScheLUis  cowper 
the  first  vacand  place  of  bursarie  within  the  college  of  this  bru'  at  y''  presen- 
ta'un  to  be  sustenit  y'in  during  the  space  of  fo''  zeiris  he  being  fund  qualifeit 
and  if  not  report  to  be  maid  to  ye  effect  ane  \'y''  mair  qualifeit  may  be  presentit. 


Abercrummye. 


1633]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  161 

The  said  day  it  is  statut  and  ordanit  that  ye  pur  men  within  thair  hospitall  Act  anent  the 

...  /  ..  -.T-Tr-,,.  ,  ,11  ~  poor  men  in  ye 

keip  the  tyme  of  prayeris  in  ye  Hie  Kirk  bo'  mornyng  and  evin  at  ail  occa  uns  hospitall  for 
and  that  they  keep  the  pritching  twys  on  ye  Saboth  day  and  anis  on  ye  twa  and  begmgf 
ordinar  dayis  in  the  weik  and  that  they  sit  togidder  in  ye  kirk  and  repair 
y^'to  at  ye  ringing  of  secund  bell  and  y'  they  nor  nain  of  yame  presum  nor  tak 
vpoun  hand  to  beg  any  ay''  on  the  hie  street  or  at  ye  almoushous  dyk  in  tyme 
cuing  and  quhat  persone  of  yame  beis  fund  at  ony  tyme  heirefter  to  breck  any 
of  ye  sd  statuts  they  pntlie  to  be  put  out  of  ye  hospitall  and  never  to  be  receavit 
y'in  agane. 

Qiiinto  Septembris  1633. 
The  said  day  Ar'^  Abercrumye  sone  law''  to  Willia  Abercrumye  is  buikit  Prenteis 
heirin  prenteis  w*  Johne  Gillespie  tailzo"^  to  serve  him  sevin  zeiris  as  prenteis 
and  twa  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indento''  of  ye  dait  the  thrid  day  of 
Apryll  last  by  past. 

Nona  Octohris  1633. 
The  said  day  Niniane  Andersone  pnt  deacon  convenar  being  convenit 
with  ye  deaconis  and  y''  bretherine  for  the  electing  of  twa  of  y''  number  to  put 
in  lyt  with  ye  pnt  deacone  convenar  and  to  be  presentit  to  ye  provest  bailleis 
and  csall  to  ye  effect  that  ane  of  yame  may  be  choysin  deacon  convenar  for  ye 
zeir  to  cum  be  pluralitie  of  voits  Gawin  Neisbit  zounger  and  Johne  Andersone 
zounger  cordoner  ar  electit  to  be  put  on  lyt  with  ye  sd  pnt  deacon  convenar 
and  they  to  be  presentit  to  ye  sds  provest  bailleis  and  csall  to  ye  effect  foirsd 
and  ye  lytts  to  be  pnted  be  Willia  Neilsone  zog^. 

Ninian 

Thairefter  the  sd  Niniane  Andersone  is  electit  deacon  convenar  for  ye  zeir  Anderson 

•'  electit  deac° 

to  cum.  conveener. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  deaconis  and  thair  bretherine  did 
elect  yir  fo''  personis  to  sit  for  yam  on  ye  deane  of  gild  his  csall  for  ye  zeir  to 
cu  viz  Willia  Neilsone  zounger  Johne  Andersone  elder  Gawin  Neisbit  zounger 
and  Johne  Andersone  zog''. 

xxiij  Oc"^  1633. 
The  said  day  Niniane  Andersone  deacon  convenar  did  elect  thir  personis 
following  to  be  vpoun  his  csall  for  ye  zeir  to  cii  and  first  ye  deaconis  as  follows. 

Artho''  Takatis  Robert  Cauldwall 

Johne  Listoun  Patrik  Colquhoun 

Robert  Horner  Niniane  Gilhagie 

Gabriell  Cochrane  M''  James  Hamiltoun 

James  Robesone  Patrik  Watsone 

Thomas  Andersone  Willia  Govane 

Androw  Snyp  Thomas  Brock 


i62  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 

Willia  Howie  baillie 


[1633 


Johne  Kirkwood 
Henrie  Robesone 

Johne  Andersone  elder 
Richard  Allane 
Johne  Andersone  zog'' 

Johne  MvvTC 

Gawin  Neisbit  elder 
Gawin  Neisbit  zog' 


Johne  Love 
Manasses  Lyll 


Thomas  Faws^-d  elder 
Thomas  Scott 

Thomas  llorsone 
James  Scheillis 

James  Colquhoun 
Rot  Bell 

Walter  Dowglas 
Willia  Neilsoune  elder 
W™  Neilsone  zounger 
Johne  Thomesone 
James  Rankein 
Andrew  Mvlne 
Thomas  Atchesone 
George  M'' 
Alex''  Colquhoun 

The  said  day  Thomas  Scott  is  continwit  collecto""  for  the  zeir  to  cum. 

xiij  Novembris  1633. 

The  said  day  Thomas  Scott  collecto''  maid  his  compt  of  his  intromissioun 
with  rent  and  guids  pertenyng  to  ye  sd  hospitall  and  pur  y''of  the  deacon 
convenar  deacons  and  most  p'  of  y''  brethereine  being  pnt  q''of  chairge  and 
dischairge  followis. 

Chairgis. 

In  the  first  ressavit  fra  Johne  Dauidsone  weifer  qlk  was  awin  be  ane  band 

i''xxxiii  1i  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Ite  fra  \Mllia  Cunynghame  qlk  is  awin  be  ane  band 
Ite  fra  S''  Thomas  Boyd  of  anwal  rent 
Ite  fra  M''  Gawin  Hamiltoun 
Ite  fra  the  Laird  of  Silvertoun 


Ite  fra  Gawin  Neisbit 

Ite  fra  W"'  Andersone 

Ite  fra  Macolme  Crawfurd 

Ite  fra  Willia  Howie  and  Androw 

Ite  fra  Chairlis  Pollok 

Ite  fra  Dauid  Pollok 

Ite  fra  Johne  Love 

Ite  fra  Ezekiell  Montgomrie 

Ite  fra  ye  litsters  . 


m 


ii<=xll 

xiij  ti  vj  s.  viij  d. 

xlll 

in 
xIvH 

vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
XXX  li 

Iiij  1i  vj  s.  viij  d. 

XX  % 

xiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

xij  li 

xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 


1633]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


163 


Ite  ye  superplus  of  ye  daillis  ....  xxxj  1i  xij  s. 

Ite  of  legacie  left  be  vmq"  Johne  Padie     ....  xxix  ll 

Ite  left  be  vmq" Johne  Or  of  legacie  .  .  .  .  x  I1 

Ite  left  be  vrnq"  Ro*  Parkhill         .  .  .  xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  ressavit  fra  ye  deaconis  .  .  .  .  .  j'^lx  ll 

Ite  ressavit  fra  Johne  Forker  qlk  he  was  awin  vpoun  his  band 

iij'^lxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Ite  left  in  ye  box  at  ye  last  compt  .  .  ij'^xix  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  for  ye  mort  clay's         .  .  .  .  .  .     x  ll  xv  s. 

Ite  for  ye  auld  rentall        .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  li 


SuiTia  of  all  is 


jaJvjcj  ll  iiij  d. 


Dischairge. 

In  ye  first  for  ane  mort  kist  to  vmqi'  Ro'  Andersone         .  .  xl  s. 

Ite  for  ane  winding  scheit  to  him  ....        xxviij  s. 

Ite  of  twa  threif  of  strae   .  .  .  .  .  .  xx  s. 

Ite  to  vmq"  Willia  Kirklands  wyf  .  .  .      iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  to  James  Flemyng  last  collecto''  .  .  .  iij  ll  viij  s. 

Ite  for  ane  cott  to  Mathow  Ker     .  .  .  .  vj  ll  xvj  s. 

Ite  for  cott  and  breichis  to  Nicoll  Scott     ...  lix  s.  vj  d. 

Ite  for  hardin  to  lyne  yame  .  .  .  .  .  x  s. 

Ite  for  making  y^of  ......  viij  s. 

Ite  for  ane  sark  to  Johne  Smy'      .....  xxiij  s. 

Mair  for  plaiding  to  be  hois  to  him  .  .  .  viij  s.  vj  d. 

Ite  to  James  Donald  .  .  .  .  .  xx  li  vj  s. 

Ite  to  ye  puir  men  at  ye  directioun  of  ye  deaconvenar  on  Zuill  day         Iviij  s. 
Ite  for  twa  pair  schoone  to  Willia  Calderwood       .  .  Iiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  to  Mathow  Ker  for  ane  vy''  pair  schoone  .  .  xxvj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  to  Johne  Andersone  lait  baillie  qlk  was  gevin  for  ribbanis  v  li 

Ite  to  Johne  Zoung  conforme  to  ane  warrand        .  .  .    iiij  li  x  s. 

Ite  to  Johne  Dalrimpill      .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Ite  to  Michael  Rankein      .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Ite  to  Win  Calderwood       .  .  .  .  .  .  x  li 

Ite  to  Dauid  Wilsone  .  .  .  .  vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  for  gray  clay'  to  be  claythis  to  Artho''  Fischer  Lawrie  Shaw    and    Ro' 
Crawfurd         ......  xxvij  li  ij  s. 

Ite  for  hardin  to  lyne  ye  samynn  .  .  iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  for  making  yof  .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Ite  for  ane  kie  and  band  to  ye  back  dore  .  .  .  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  to  mak  out  ye  hundrethe  punds  qlk  was  lent  to  M'  Niniane  Capbell 

XV  ll  xix  s. 
Ite  to  Johne  Woddrow       ......  Iviij  s. 


Iviij  s. 

xH 

Iviij  s. 

vj  s.  viij  d. 

.  V  1  xvj  s. 

xix  s. 

iij  s. 

vt 

Iviij  s.  iiij  d. 

164  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1633 

Ite  to  \V™  Calderwood  for  dressing  ye  muscatts  and  convenyng  deac^^  to  ye 

daills  deilling  ..... 

Ite  to  Johne  Duncane  smy'  .... 

Ite  to  Johne  Neilsone  ane  pur  mane 

Ite  to  Ar<i  Wilsone  .  .  .  .  .       iij  ll 

Ite  to  James  Padie  for  going  doun  to  sie  ye  daillis 

Ite  to  Michaell  Rankein     ..... 

Ite  for  ane  riddill  ..... 

Ite  for  clay's  to  Johne  Smy'  .... 

Ite  for  gray  clayth  to  be  breichis  to  Nicoll  Scott  . 

Ite  for  hardin  to  be  lynings  yto     .  .  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Ite  for  making  y'^of  ......  xvj  s. 

Ite  for  ye  helping  of  ye  brig  over  ye  water  at  Natham  fut     xiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Ite  to  ye  clerk  for  his  fie  .  .  .  .    xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  to  Johne  Duncane  smy*  .....  Iviij  s. 

Ite  for  ane  bukat  .  .  .  .  .  .  vj  s. 

Ite  gevin  to  Androw  Allanesone  and  Johne  Auldcorne  for  y''  support  at  fyve 

marks  ye  quarter  ilk  ane  of  yame        .  .  xxvj  1i  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  to  ye  college  collecto''  for  susten'un  of  ye  hospitallis  burso^ 

Ixvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Ite  for  coillis  and  peitis     .  .  .  .  xij  li  x-viij  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  gevin  to  ye  pur  men    ......  j'^lx  li 

Ite  lent  out  vpoun  band  to  Johne  Baird  qlk  is  producit  j<'xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Ite  lent  to  Johne  Scott  vpoun  his  band  producit  Ixvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Ite  lent  to  Johne  Naper  vpoun  his  band  producit  Ixvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  to  James  Scheillis  zounger  lent  conforme  to  his  band  producit 

Ixvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Ite  to  Richard  .\llane  conforme  to  his  band  producit         .  .  v^^  ll 

Ite  lent  to  M^  Niniane  Campbell  minister  at  Kilmacolme  conforme  to  his  band 

product  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  j"^  ll 

Suiha  of  ye  haill  discharge  is  .  .  j'^'lvj'^j  li  iiij  d. 

And  sua  dischairge  and  chairge  being  calculat  togidder  the  said  comptar  restis 

awin  to  ye  said  deacon  convenar  and  remanent  deaconis  ye  sowme  following 

ij<=xij  ll  vij  s.  viij  d. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  deaconis  and  y"'  bretheiine  hes  fred 
and  quhytt  ye  sd  xij  ll  vij  s.  viij  d.  for  his  panis  this  zeir  bygaine  and  to  cum 
and  ordas  him  to  be  chargit  with  ye  sd  ij  ^^  li  f oirsd  allanerlie. 

Clerk  and  offi'  The  said  day  Willia  Zair  is  continwit  clerk  and  Willia  Calderwood  ofh'' 

con  inwit.         ^^j.  g^j^g  ^gjj.  ^^  ^^j^  quha  being  pnt  gav  y'  ay's  as  vse  is. 

CaiderwocKi.  The  said  day  ordas  ye  collecto"'  to  giv  to  Willia  Calderwood  offi'  aught 

punds  to  help  to  by  ane  stand  of  clay's. 


1634]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  165 

Nota  ve  collecto'  eat  out    Tohne  Lovis  band  and  Chairlis  Mowatts  band  Band  takm 
also.  ^ 

xiiij  De'  1633. 

The  said    day  Henrie  Mwrrey  sone  law"  to  Johne  Mwrrey  induellar  in  Prenteis 
Glasgow  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Johne  Robesone  weiver  to  serve  him      ""^^' 
sevin  zeiris  conforme  to  ye  indentor  producit  of  ye  dait  ye  seed  day  of  Septem.ber 
last. 

XXV  Fe"'  1634. 

The  said  day  Johne  Pettegrew  law"  sone  to  Thomas  Pettegrew  in  Schettil-  Prenteis 
stoun  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  At^  Howie  litster  to  serve  him  sevin  zeiris  Pettegrew. 
as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indento"^  maid  yi'anent 
of  ye  dait  ye  xxviij  day  of  Marche  jajvjc  threttie  ane  zeiris. 

26  Martif  1634. 

The  said  day  Artho''  Takatis  deacone  of  ye  hamermane  Gabriell  Cochrane  Muscattis  w' 

deacone  of  ye  skynnei s  and  Ro'  Cauldwall  deacone  of  ye  maissouns  gav  in  pu\?n  'ye°  ^ 

and  producit  y''  muscatts  stafs  and  bandaleirs  viz  ilk  ane  of  yame  ane  qlks  hospitaii. 
ar  put  vp  amongest  ye  rest. 

xiiij  Maij  1634. 

The  said  day  Willia  Weir  cordoner  is  admitit  to  remayne  in  ye  hospitall  Weir  in 
and  ordanis  him  to  be  sustenit  y^'in  as  ye  rest  is.  °^^' 

The  said  day  ordanis  ye  coUecto''  to  pay  to  Androw    Harvie    gardner  Harvie. 
quarterlie  fyve  maks  mo^y  and  ane  laid  of  coillis. 

Nola  ye  collecto''  hes  takin  out  Dauid  Polloks  band  to  put  to  execu-un.  Coiiecto'. 

The  said  day  Androw  Baxter  sone  law"  to  Willia  Baxter  in  Nather  Possill  Baxter 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Walter  M^^Cala  cordoner  to  serve  him  sevin  zeiris  ^^'^'^  '"^' 
conforme  to  ye  indento''  maid  yi'anent  of  ye  dait  ye  xvj  day  of  Januar  jajvjc 
threttie  three  zeiris. 

xxj  Aiigustj  1634. 

The  said  day  Johne  Gairdner  maltman  is  admitit  and  receavit  to  remayne  Gairdner  in 
within  ye  hospitall  and  ordanis  him  to  be  sustenit  y^in  as  ane  of  the  sex  men.    °^P''^  • 

The  said  day  Johne  Listoun  deacone  of  ye  cordoneris  and  M'  James  Hamil-  Muskatis. 
toune  deacone  of  ye  chirurgianis  gav  in  y''  muscatis  w'  stafis  and  bandaleiris 
to  remayne  in  ye  hospitall. 

The  said  day  ordanis  ye  coUecto''  to  pay  quarterlie  to  Robert  Fischer  Fischer. 
tailzo''  fyve  marks  mo^  for  his  help  and  supplie  ay  quhill  he  be  dischairgit. 


i66 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1634 


Hammiltoun.  The  said  day  ordanis  ye  collecto''  to  giv  to  Chairlis  Hamiltoun  twa  dollops 

extending  to  v  ll  xvj  s.  for  his  supplie. 


Presenta'un 
for  the  dekine 
coQvenar. 


Octaiw  Ociohris  1634. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacone  convenar  deaconis  and  y'  bretherine  being 
convenit  for  electioune  of  three  persones  of  y''  nwmber  to  be  presentit  to  ye 
provest  bailleis  and  csall  of  this  bru'  to  ye  effect  that  ane  of  tham  may  be 
admitit  deacone  convenar  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  be  plurahtie  of  voitis  they 
electit  and  nominat  Johne  Andersone  elder  cordoner  Gawin  Neisbit  and  Niniane 
Gilhagie  maltman  to  be  presentit  to  ye  saids  provest  bailleis  and  counsall  to 
ye  effect  foirsd  and  the  lyttis  to  be  presentit  be  Walter  Dowglas. 

Neisbit  dekine  Thairefter   the   said   Gawin   Neisbit   being   electit   and   choysin   deacone 

convenar.         convenar  for  the  zeir  to  cum  he  maid  choys  of  his  csall  as  followis  and  first  of 
the  deaconis. 


Allane  Naper 
Richard  Allane 
James  Ogil  vie 
James  Padie 
Thomas  Scott 
Johne  Falconer 
James  Pollok 


James  Rankein 
James  Colquhoun 
Niniane  Gilhagie 
Ml'  James  Hamiltoun 
Robert  Watsone 
Willia  Govane 
Dauid  Jack 


Niniane  Andersone  baillie 


Arthof  Taccatis 
Johne  Kirkwood 
Henrie  Robesone 


Johne  Andersone  elder 

Johne 

Johne  Listoun 


Andersone  zog'' 


Ro*  Horner 
Johne  Mwre 
Johne  Briscatt 

Androw  Colquhoun 

Gabriell  Cochrane 
Manasses  Lyll 

Thomas  Fawsyd 
James  Robesone 


Thomas  Morsone 
Androw  Snyp 

Patrik  Colquhoun 
Rot  Bell 

Walter  Dowglas 
W'm  Neilsone  elder 
\\n\  Neilsone  zog^ 
Rot  Patersone 
Willia  Wilsone 
Rot  Cauldwall 
Androw  Mylne 
Willia  Howie 
George  MwTe 
Patrik  Watsone 


1634]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  167 

Quarto  Novembris  1634. 

The  said  clay  Thomas  Scott  lait  collecto"'  maid  his  compt  of  his  intro- 
missioun  with  ye  guids  pertenyng  to  ye  craftis  hospitall  since  the  last  tyme 
he  was  admitit  collecto'"  the  dekin  convenar  dekins  and  most  p'  of  y''  counsell 
being  pnt  q'^of  the  chairge  and  dischairge  followis. 

Chairg. 

Item  he  chairgis  himself  with  ye  sowme  following  qlk  was  restand  in  his  hand 
at  ye  last  compt  .  .  .  .  .  .  ij  <^  li 

Ite  fra  M''  Gawin  Hamiltoun  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  his  iiij^  li  ye  Mertimes  and 
Witsonday  tmes  last   .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  tl 

Ite  fra  Johne  Baird  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  twa  hundrethe  males  for  ye  Witsonday 
and  Mertimes  tmes  1633  ....    xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  fra  James  Scheillis  for  ye  sds  tmes       .  .  .     vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  fra  Willia  Andersone  .  .  .  .     vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Mair  fra  him  for  ye  last  zeiris  burges  silver  .  .  xj  ll  x  s. 

Ite  fra  Thomas  Aitchesone  litster  .  .  .     vj  tl  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  fra  Gawin  Neisbit         ......  xlv  ll 


Ite  fra  S''  Thomas  Boyd 
Ite  fra  M''  Niniane  Campbell 
Ite  fra  ye  Laird  of  Silvertounhill 
Ite  fra  Richard  AUane 
Ite  fra  Dauid  Pollok 


XX  ll 

xt 

111 
in 

xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  fra  Willia  Howie  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  his  sowme  ye  tme  of  Mertimes  1633 

xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Ite  fra  Chairlis  Pollok         .  .  .  .  .  .  xx  ll 

Ite  fra  Johne  Love  .  .  .  .  .  .  xij  ll 

Ite  fra  M^  George  Law  quhilk  was  left  to  ye  sd  hospitall  in  legacie  be  ye  late 
Archbischope  of  Glasgow         .  .  .  j<^lxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  fra  ye  Laird  of  Blakhall  qlk  he  payit  as  cau""  for  Chairlis  Mowatt 

iij<^xxxiij  ll  vj  s.   viij  d. 

This  was  payit  to  Niniane  Andersone  he  being  dekine  convenar  q^'vpoun  he 
gav  ane  assigna'un  of  ye  band  to  ye  Laird  of  Blakhall  qlk  was  reportit 
back  and  Gawin  Neisbit  gave  ane  discharge  to  ye  prin'i  pairtie  at  ye  caul's 
desjrris. 

Ite  fra  Johne  Andersone  for  ye  vse  of  ane  hundrethe  marks  fra  Michaelmes 
last  to   Mertimes  nixt  to  cu  .  .  .  .  xix  s. 

Ite  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  xl  ll  fra  Androw  Lyll        .  .  .  xl  s, 

Ite  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  twa  hundrethe  maks  qlk  he  keepit  in  his  awin  hand 
fra  Witsond  last  to  Mertimes  nixt  to  cu  .  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d, 

Ite  fra  Alex''  Campbell        .  .  ,  .  .  .  xl  ll 


i6S 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1634 


Ite  ressavit  fra  Mathow  Ker  for  ye  auld  rentall 
Ite  fra  Johne  Andersone  for  ye  burges  silver 
Ite  for  ye  mortclaithis 

Suma  of  ye  haill  chairgis  is   . 


xlH 

xxxij  I1  vj  s. 

xix  s. 

jajjcjiiij  jj  xiiij  s. 


e  recept  of  ye  former 


Dischairge 
Ite  to  Ro*  Glasgow 
Ite  to  Johne  Wotherspone 
Ite  to  Dauid  Wilsone  cowper  .  .  .  .    vj  I1 

Ite  to  Willia  Calderwood  offi'' 

Ite  to  Willia  Fultoun  bonnetmaker 

Mair  to  W"^  Calderwood    . 

Mair  to  him  for  twa  pair  of  schoone 

Ite  to  Ro'  Crawfurd    quhen  he  was  on  deid  bed 

Mair  to  him  for  ane  kist  and  ane  winding  scheit 

Mair  for  aill  breid  and  candill  at  his  lykwak 

Ite  to  Mathow  Ker  for  ane  pair  of  schoone 

Ite  for  fyve  ellis  of  claith  to  be  ane  gowne  to  Lawrence 

Ite  for  ye  making  y'^oi 

Ite  spent  w'  M"'  George  Law  at  y 

Ite  to  Johne  Brane 

Ite  to  Finlaw  Shakshaw     . 

Ite  to  James  Cauldwall  cordoner 

Ite  to  Willia  Woderspone 

Ite  to  Johne  Hunter 

Ite  to  ane  pur  man  y'  was  cutit  of  ye  stone 

Ite  to  Androw  Harvie        .  .  .  .  .       iij  li  vj  s. 

Ite  to  him  for  ane  laid  of  coillis     .  .  .  .  vj  s. 

Ite  to  ane  blind  man  in  Sanct  Androws     . 

Ite  for  claithe  to  be  ane  pair  of  hois  to  Johne  Smy' 

Ite  for  aught  ellis  hardin  to  be  scheitts  to  LawTie  Shaw  liij  s. 

Mair  for  making  yof  ...... 

Ite  for  raising  hornjmg  vpoun  Chairls  Mowats  band  xlviij  s. 

Ite  for  chairging  ye  Laird  of  Blakhall  and  wrytting  of  ane  assigna^un 
Ite  for  claith  to  be  ane  sark  to  Nicoll  Scott 
Ite  for  mending  of  ye  glas  widow  .... 


Shaw 

legacie 

vj  ti 
vj  li 


Iviij  s. 

xix  s. 

xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

viij  ll 

.  xj  li  xij  s. 

viij  li 

liij  s.  iiij  d. 

xxix  s. 

liiij  s. 

XX  s. 

xxvj  s.  viij  d. 

ix  ll 

xij  s. 

s. 

xl  s. 

xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xix  li 

xxix  s. 

vj  ll 

viij  d. 

viij  d. 

xl  s. 

xvj  s. 

iiij  d. 

ij  s. 

iiij  d. 

,xx  s. 

XXX  s. 

Is. 


Ite  to  Michaell  Blair  tailzo''  for  ane  disposition  of  xxj  s.  iiij  d.  be  zeir  out  of 
J  as  Mitchells  land       .....  xiiij  li  x  s. 

Ite  to  Barthilmow  MwTe  in  his  seiknes       ....  xix  s. 

Ite  for  ane  kist  and  scheit  to  him  .  .  .  .  Is. 

Ite  to  Willia  Bogle  for  Ro'  Crawfurd  and  ye  sd  Barthilmow  for  ringing  of  ye 
bell     ........  xix  s. 

Ite  for  yron  to  ye  bell  at  ye  mending  yof  .  .  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 


1634J        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  169 


Ite  for  oj-11  to  yc  bell 


1]S. 


Iviij  s. 

iij  tl  V)  s.  viij  d. 

Ivij  s. 

xxvij  s.  vj  d. 


Ite  to  Walter  Myllar  for  his  supplie 

Ite  to  Ro'  Fischer  tailzo'  . 

Ite  for  lyme  and  sand  to  poynt  ye  hous 

Ite  for  sklaits  and  fog  yto 

Ite  to  ye  warkmen  for  dressing  ye  ly  and  sand  and  poynting  ye  hous 

V  ll  xij  s. 

Ite  for  coullo''ing  of  ye  staincho''s  ....     xxxviij  s. 

Ite  to  Johne  Rankein  sumtyme  dekin  convenar  in  Dundie  v  ti  xvj  s. 

Ite  to  Chairls  Hamiltoun  .  .  .  .  v  li  xvj  s. 

Ite  to  Jo"  Auldcorne  baxter  .  .  .  xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  to  Androw  Allanesone  .  .  .  xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  to  ye  clerk        .....  xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  for  aught  ells  hardin  to  be  Johne  Gairdner  ane  pair  of  scheits  Ivj  s. 

Ite  to  ye  college  collecto"'  for  y  bursar        .  .  Ixvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  for  coillis  and  peits  to  ye  pur  men  in  ye  hous  xij  ll  viij  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  for  oyll  to  ye  muscatts  .  .  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Ite  lent  out  to  Willia  and  Walter  Ly^bodis  conforme  to  y  band  ij<=ll 

Ite  to  Androw  Lyll  lent  conforme  to  ae  band         .  .  .  xl  ll 

Ite  lent  to  ye  Ladie  Lus  conforme  to  ae  band        .         iij^'xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Ite  lent  to  Johne  Andersone  conforme  to  his  band  Ixvj  ll    xiij  s.    iiij  d. 

Ite  debursit  in  persut  of  vmq''^  Helene  Flemyngs  ex^'s  for  hir  legacie  nor  zit 
elicht  .......  xiiij  s. 

Suma  of  ye  dischairge  is        .  .  .  ix<=xiiij  li  ix  s. 

And  sua  chairge  and  dischairge  being  calculat  he  is  restand  awin 
in  to  ye  next  collecto''      ....  ij ''xiiij  li  v  s. 

Memorand  y''  is  na  anwal  rents  ressavit  be  this  collecto"'  for  yis  last  zeir 
fra  Macolme  Crawfurd  Ezekiell  Montgomrie  Ite  fra  Androw  Mwris  relict 
and  W™  Howie  for  ye  Witsonday  tme  last  allanerlie  of  y  viij''  maks  nor  fra 
Johne  Naper  nor  fra  Johne  Scott. 

The  said  day  the  said  Thomas  Scott  delyverit  to  ye  deacone  convenar 
to  be  put  in  ye  box  becaus  ane  of  ye  keis  was  not  pnt  the  band  following  viz 
the  foirsaid  band  grantit  be  ye  sd  W""  and  Walter  Ly*bodis  and  y  caul's  for 
ye  sd  sowme  of  twa  hundrethe  punds  qlks  sould  be  payit  at  Mertimes  nixt 
w'  XX  ll  of  anwal  rent  Ite  Androw  Lyll  his  band  and  Jo"  Gilmo''  zoger  his 
ca^  for  xl  ll  to  be  payit  at  Witsonday  nixt  w'  ,xl  s.  of  anwal  rent  Ite  ye  Ladie 
Lus  hir  band  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  nixt  w'  xxv  inks  of  anwal  ret  Ite  Jo" 
Andersones  band  of  j  '^  mks  to  be  payit  at  Merts  1635  w'  ten  mks  of  anwal  rent 
Ite  Johne  Lovis  band  and  (  )  Pollok  of  Waltoun  his  band  togidder 

with  ye  dispositioun  maid  be  ye  foirsd  Michaell  Blair  of  ye  sd  xxj  s.  iiij  d.  out 
of  James  Mitchells  lands. 


170 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1634 


Mwre 
coUecto'. 


Clerk 
continwit. 


Prenteis 
Andrew, 


The  said  day  be  pluralitie  of  votis  Johne  Mwre  tailzo'  is  electit  collector 
for  ane  zeir  to  cum  quha  being  pnt  acceptit  ye  sd  office  in  and  vpoun  him  and 
gav  his  aithe  de  fideli  adminisira~ ne  y^intill. 

The  said  day  Willia  Zair  is  contenit  clerk  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  quha  being 
pnt  acceptit  and  gav  his  aithe  as  vse  is. 

xxvj  No'  1634. 

The  said  day  Thomas  Scott  last  collector  producit  ane  band  of  twa 
hundrethe  punds  grantit  be  Walter  Neilsone  and  his  cau's  to  be  payit  at 
Witsonday  nixt  with  ten  punds  of  anwal  rent  and  that  in  satisfactioun  of  ye 
twa  hundrethe  punds  awin  be  ye  sd  Thomas  Scott  to  ye  pur  of  ye  sd  hospitall 
qlk  band  is  put  in  ye  box  and  the  deacone  convenar  deaconis  and  ye  bretherine 
dischargit  ye  sd  Thoas  Scott  of  ye  od  mo'^y  contenit  in  his  compt  viz  of  ye 
sowme  of  fourtein  punds  fy^•e  schillingis. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  producit  ane  band  grantit  be  Dauid 
Colquhoun  as  prin'i  and  Niniane  Patersone  his  cau"^  for  ye  fyve  hundrethe 
marks  qlk  was  awin  be  ye  Ladie  Lus  and  als  he  delyverit  all  the  rest  of  ye 
bands  (except  Johne  Lovis)  qlk  ar  put  in  ye  box. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  deacones  and  haill  bretherine  pnt 
ordanis  y'  collector  to  giv  to  ilk  pur  man  in  ye  hospitall  twa  marks  mo^ 
quarterlie  mair  nor  they  gat  of  befoir  in  augmenta'un  of  y''  ordinar  dewtie. 

The  said  day  James  Androw  sone  law"  to  vmq'^  James  Androw  is  buikit 
heirin  as  prentes  with  Phillane  Kyll  cowper  to  serve  him  as  prenteis  during 
aught  zeiris  as  prenteis  conforme  to  ye  indentar  maid  y''anent  of  ye  dait  ye 
xxiij  day  of  Februar  jajvic  threttie  zeiris. 


Preateis 
Fiulay. 


XXV  Fe''>  1635. 

The  said  day  Johne  Finlay  sone  law"  to  Willia  Finlay  in  Middle  Baddorren 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Patrik  Colquhoun  to  serve  him  sevin  zeiris  as 
prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indento''  sett  doun 
betixt  yem  yi'anent  of  the  dait  ye  penult  day  of  Januar  1629  zeirs. 


xviij  Marti]  1635. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  deacones  and  maist  p'  of  y''  counsall 
being  convenit  in  respect  that  they  had  gevin  twa  marks  of  augmenta~un 
quarterlie  to  ilk  pur  mane  within  y''  hospitall  thairfoir  they  ar  content  all  in 
ane  voce  that  certane  honest  men  be  electit  and  choysin  to  stent  ye  haill  calling 
within  this  bru'  lyable  to  yem  to  ye  effect  ye  sd  augmenta-un  may  be  gottin 
in  that  way. 


1635]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  171 


Nono  Julij  1635. 

The  said  day  Johne  Dunlope  sone  to  Williame  Dwnlop  of  Blook  is  buikit  Prenteis 
heirin  prenteis  with  Robert  Wylhe  covvper  to  serve  him  fyve  zeirs  as  prenteis 
conforme  to  the  indentor  sett  doun  y^anent  of  the  dait  ye  aught  of  this  instant. 


Uunlope. 


xxvij  August  1635. 

The  said  day  Gawin  Neisbit  pnt  deacone  convenar  gave  in  his  corslat  Corsiat 
to  ye  hospitall  conforme  to  ye  ordof  sett  doun  y^anent  quhilk  hes  ane  heid 
peice  and  twa  foir  tailhs. 


Neisbit. 


The  said  day  Allane  Naper  deacone  of  hamermen  and    James  Pollok  Muskattis. 
deacone  of  cowperis  producit  and  gave  in  ilk  ane  of  yem  ane  muscatt  with 
staf  and  bandeleiris  conforme  to  ye  ordo''. 

The  said  day  Dauid  Wilsone  cowper  is  ordanit  to  haif  fyve  marks  quarterlie  wilsoun. 
and  to  begin  now  at  this  Lambes  quarter  and  ordanis  the  collector  to  giv  to 
Wilha  Houstoun  ten  marks  mo^y  for  his  pnt  necessitie  and  to  gett  na  mair 
whill  Lambes  nixt. 

The  said  day  the  persona  following  war  electit  to  stent  the  haill  craftis 
anent  ye  payment  of  the  augmenta~un  grantit  to  ye  pur  men  in  ye  hospitall 
conforme  to  ane  act  of  ye  dait  ye  xviij  of  Marche  last  viz  Willia  Neilsone 
zounger  Artho"^  Taccatts  Jo"  Andersone  zounger  cordoner  Ro'  Horner  Patrik 
Colquhoun  Manasses  Lyll  Ro'  Cauldwall  James  Robesone  baxter  Androw 
Snype  cowper. 

Secundo  Octohris  1635. 

The  said  day  the  foirsaidis  persones  quha  ar  mentionat  in  ye  former  act 
of  ye  dait  ye  xvij  day  of  August  last  compeirit  and  producit  the  roll  last  sett 
doun  be  them  anent  ye  augmenta'un  to  be  payit  to  ye  pur  of  their  hospitall 
and  ye  deacone  convenar  the  baillie,  Niniane  Andersone,  with  ye  most  part 
of  ye  auld  deaconis  and  haill  new  deaconis  being  all  present  (except  ye  visito'' 
of  ye  maltmen  the  deacon  of  tailzo^'s  and  flescho^s)  ratefeit  and  approvit  ye 
samynn  and  ordanis  the  sd  roll  to  be  regrat  heirin  and  everie  deacone  to  pay 
quarterlie  thair  p'  yoi  conforme  y'to. 


Followis  the  roll. 


The  maltmen 
The  smythis 
The  tailzo^s 
The  cordoneris 
The  weiferis 


xxxiiij  ll 

XX  ll 

xxiiij  1i 

xxiiij  ll 

xij  1 


172 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1635 


The  skynneris 
The  cowperis 
The  baxteris 
The  wrythis 
The  masounes 
The  chirurgianes 
The  flescho''s 
The  bonnetmakeris 
The  htsteris 
The  gairdneris 


xij  1j  vj  s.  viij  d. 

xj  ll 
viij  ll  xii]  s.  iiij  d. 

xjt 
vij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

iiij  ll 

xj  tl 

Iiij  s.  iiij  d. 

vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 


Decimo  quarto  Oc"*  1635. 

The  whilk  day  Gawin  Neisbit  now  baillie  lait  deacone  convenar  the 
deacones  and  y^  bretherine  being  convenit  for  electing  three  of  y^  nwmber 
to  be  pntit  to  ye  provest  balles  and  csall  of  this  bru'  to  ye  effect  ane  of  yem 
might  be  choysin  to  beir  ofhce  as  deacone  convenar  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  be 
plurahtie  of  voittis  Niniane  Gilhagie  Ro'  Allane  and  Johne  Andersone  zounger 
ar  ordanit  to  be  put  on  lytt  and  to  be  pntit  be  Niniane  Andersone  lait  bailie. 

Thairefter  the  said  Ninian  Gilhagie  being  electit  deacone  convenar  for 
the  zeir  to  cum  he  maid  choys  of  his  csall  as  followis  and  first  of  ye  deacones. 

[Second  entry  crossed  out.] 

Decimo  quHo  Odobris  1635. 

The  said  day  Williame  Neilsone  zounger  Nmiane  Andersone  Johne 
Andersone  elder  and  Richard  Allane  be  pluralitie  of  voitis  ar  electit  and 
choysin  to  be  on  ye  deane  of  gild  counsall  for  j^e  craftis  this  zeir  to  cum. 


XX]  Oc'''  1635. 

Niniane  Gilhagie  being  choysin  deacon  convenar  did  elect  the  persones 
following  to  be  on  ye  deacone  convenar  his  csall  this  zeir  to  cum  and  ye  deacones. 


Johne  Maxwall 
Willia  Coittis 
Johne  Mure 
Manasses  Lyll 
James  Robesone  x 
Williame  Feilconer 
Robert  Snype  x 


Johne  Boyd 
Patrik  Colquhoun 
Willia  Wilsone 
Rot  Ari 

Patrik  Watsone  x 
Thomas  Naismy' 
Thomas  Brock 


Gawin  Neisbit  baillie 


1635]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


173 


Allane  Naper 
Thomas  Myllar 
Johne  Kirkwood 

Niniane  Andersone 
Johne  Andersone  elder 
Johne  Andersone  zounger 
Richard  Allane 

Robert  Horner 
James  Ogilvie 
Johne  Birscatt 
Andrew  Colquhoun 

James  Padie   x 
Johne  Biggart 

Thomas  Scott 

Johne  Falconer 

James  Rankin 


James  Pollok  x 
Androw  Snype 
James  Colquhoun 
Johne  Baird  x 

Walter  Dowglas 
Willia  Neilsone  elder 
Willia  Neilsone  zoger 
Ro'  Patersone 
James  Wotherspone 

Willia  Howie 
Johne  M<^Ewin  x 
Dauid  Howie 

George  Mur 

Ro'  Watsone 
Alex"'  Colquhoun  x 


The  haill  foirsds  persones  (except  Johne  Boyd  Ro'  Ar''  Niniane  and  Johne 
Andersones  elder  Ro'  Horner  James  Pollok  James  Colquhoun  W"  Neilsone 
elder  W™  Howie  Jo°  M<=Ewin  Dauid  Howie  George  Mur  Alex"^  Colquhoun) 
acceptit  ye  sd  office  and  gav  y''  aithe  as  vse  is. 

The  said  day  James  Wotherspone  is  [be]  pluralitie  of  votis  electit  collector  Wotherspone 
for  ye  zeir  to  cu  quha  being  pnt  acceptit  ye  sd  office  in  and  vpoun  him  and  ™  ^'^^°'' 
gav  his  ayt  as  vse  is. 


The  said  day  Willia  Zair  is  contenwit  clerk  and  gav  his  aithe  as  vse  is. 

Quarto  No"'  1635. 

The  said  day  Johne  Muir  collecto''  maid  his  compt  the  deacon  convenar 
deacones  and  most  p'  of  y^  bretherine  being  pnt  q'"of  chairge  and  dischairge 
followis. 


Clerk 

continoit. 


Chairge. 

Ite  fra  Macolme  Crawfurd  of  anwal  re' 

Ite  fra  David  Colquhoun   . 

Ite  fra  Ezekiell  Montgomrie 

Ite  fra  ye  Laird  of  Silvertounhill 

Ite  fra  W"  Howie  and  vmqi«  Andro  Muris  wyf 


xxxiij  %  vj  s.  viij  d. 

xvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xlll 

in 

.     Iiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 


174 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1635 


Ite  fra  ye  ex'''^  of  vinq'^  James  Hamiltoun  of  legacie 

Ite  fra  Johne  Scheillis 

Ite  fra  M'  Gawin  Hamiltoun 

Ite  fra  Willia  and  Walter  Lytbodies 

Ite  fra  Gawin  Neisbit 

Ite  fra  M''  Niniane  Campbell 

Ite  fra  Walter  Neilsone 

Ite  fra  Chairlis  Pollok 

Ite  fra  ye  ex'''^  of  vmqi^  Mathow  Merschell  of  legacie 

Ite  fra  ye  ex'''^  of  vmq'e  Willia  Lochlay  of  legacie 

Ite  fra  ye  litsteris  .... 

Ite  fra  Richard  Allane        .... 

Ite  fra  Johne  Baird  .... 

Ite  fra  ye  ex'''^  of  vmq'^  Gawin  Neisbit  of  legacie 

Ite  fra  Androw  Lyll  .... 


xxxii]  %  v]  s.  viij  d. 

vj  ll  xii]  s.  iiij  d. 

xlH 

XX  ll 

xlvt 

X  H 

xH 

XX  li 

xH 

iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

vj  li  xii]  s.  iiij  d. 

Ill 

xii]  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

xxvj  ll  xii]  s.  iiij  d. 

xls. 


Ite  ressavit  at  Mertimes  last  fra  W™  Howie  and  ye  ex'''^  of  vmq'^  Androw 


VI  c; 


Mur    ..... 

Ite  ressavit  fra  ye  deacones 

Ite  producit  be  Mathow  Ker  for  ye  rentall 

Suma  of  ye  chairge  is 

Dischairge. 
In  ye  first  to  James  Cauldwall 
Ite  to  Dauid  Wilsone         ....  vj 

Ite  to  Rot  Glasgow 

Ite  for  parchment  to  wryt  ye  buik  of  gildrie  on 
Ite  for  writting  y^oi  .  .  .  .  •      ») 

Ite  spent  at  ye  recept  of  twa  infeftments 
Ite  for  strae  to  ye  bedis     . 

Ite  for  ane  stand  of  maid  claithis  to  Willia  Weir 
Ite  for  grayis  to  be  hois  to  Johne  Gairdner  and  W™  Weir 
Ite  for  making  of  them 
Ite  for  (  )  tow  to  ye  bell 

Ite  for  ane  pair  of  scheittis  to  Johne  Smy' 
Ite  for  schoone  to  Mathow  Ker 
Ite  to  W™  Calderwood  for  twa  pair  schoone 
Ite  to  ye  college  collecto''  for  ye  bursar  .  Ixvj 

Ite  to  ane  poor  bonnetmaker  callit  Corbet t 
Ite  to  Johne  Dalrimpill 
Ite  for  oyll  to  ye  muskats 
Ite  to  Finlaw  Shakshaw     . 
Ite  for  mending  ye  chymney  in  ye  laiche  hous 
Ite  for  grayis  to  be  hois  to  Nicoll  Scott  and  Lawrence  Shaw 


xxxiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

jclvj  H 

xlj  ll  j  s.  iiij  d. 

j*lii<=xx  ll  xiiij  s.  iiij  d. 


Iviij  s. 

ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Iviij  s. 

xliiij  s. 

li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

xxxij  s. 

XX  s. 

iiij  li  X  s. 

xxxvij  s.  vj  d. 

vj  s. 

(  ) 

Iviij  s.  viij  d. 

xxvj  s.  viij  d. 

Iiij  s.  iiij  d. 

li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xxix  s. 

xix  s. 

xij  s. 

V  ll  XV j  s. 

xix  s. 
xxxvij  s.  vj  d. 


1635]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  175 


And  for  making  of  yem      .  .  .  .  •  •  vj  s. 

Ite  for  ane  sark  to  Nicoll  Scott      .....        xxxij  s. 

Ite  to  W™  Calderwood  for  grayis  to  be  his  claithis  .  xiij  t  xvj  s. 

And  for  lyningis  to  yem     ......       xxviij  s. 

And  for  making  of  yem      ......         xxix  s. 

Ite  for  three  ells  grayis  to  Artho'  Fischer  .  .         v  ll  xij  s.  vj  d. 

And  for  lynings  to  his  claithis        ....  xxvj  s.  viij  d. 

And  making  y^oi   .......  xvj  s. 

Ite  for  grayis  to  [be]  brichis  to  Jo^  Gairner  .  .  .  xlv  s. 

And  for  lyning  and  making  .  .  .  •  •  xx  s. 

Ite  to  Johne  Naper  .  .  .  .  .  v  ll  xvj  s. 

Ite  to  W"  Calderwood       .  .  .  .  •  iij  ll  vij  s. 

Ite  to  James  Neilsone        ......  Iviij  s. 

Ite  debursit  to  mak  ye  sowme  he  ressavit  fra  W™  Howie  out  ane  thowsand 
marks  .....  jcxxxvj  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  left  be  him  in  ye  box  ......  Iviij  s. 

Ite  for  Ix  daillis  to  ye  hospitall      .... 

Ite  for  leiding  yem  ..... 

Ite  for  ane  mikle  trie  ..... 

Ite  for  leiding  y''of  ..... 

Ite  for  sawing  of  it 

Ite  for  sawing  xvj  daillis   ..... 

Ite  to  Chairlis  Snype  ..... 

Ite  for  ane  pair  plaiding  hois  to  Johne  Smy' 

Ite  for  grayis  to  be  cot  and  breichis  to  Lawrence  Shaw  iiij  li 


Ite  for  lyningis  to  yem       .... 

And  for  making  y''of  .... 

Ite  for  blew  claithe  to  be  ane  goun  to  Nicoll  Scott 

And  making  y''of   ..... 

Ite  for  dressing  ye  muscatts  to  W"  Calderwood    . 

Ite  to  Wn»  Wotherspone     .... 

Ite  to  Gawin  Loche  .... 

Ite  to  W"!  Howstoun  .... 

Ite  for  leiding  of  xj  lang  stones     . 

Ite  for  wining  of  yem         .... 

Ite  to  ye  clerk  of  fie  . 

Ite  for  ane  vy^  grait  trie    .... 

Ite  for  ane  pair  of  scheitis  to  Archo''  Fischor 

Ite  for  bands  to  ye  windois 

Ite  for  naills  y^to  ..... 

Ite  to  Patrik  Colquhoun  for  wark  in  ye  hospitall  . 

Ite  for  four  ells  of  bleichit  hardin  and  grayis  to  be  Nicoll  Scott  claithes 

vj  ll  xvj  s.  iiij  d. 


xxiiij  li 

xvj  s. 

iij  li 

iiij  s. 

vj  s. 

xlij  s. 

V  li  xvj  s. 

ix  s. 

xvj  s. 

xxiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xvj  s. 

xjH 

xvj  s. 

xix  s. 

xix  s. 

iiij  li  vij  s. 

vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

v  ll  x  s. 

iij  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

vj  li 

iij  ll  iiij  s. 

xxiiij  s. 

iiij  s. 

viij  ll  viij  d. 


176  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1635 

And  for  making  y^of  ......  xvj  s. 

Ite  to  Ro'  Fischer  and  Johne  Auldcorne  of  pensioun  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  gevin  to  j^e  poor  men  in  ye  hospitall  .  .  .  Ivj  li 

Mair  to  yem  in  augmenta-un         .....       xxxvj  ll 
Ite  to  Jas  Rankin  for  ane  stone  to  ye  foir  zett      .  .  .        xxiiij  s. 

Ite  for  coillis  and  peitis      .  .  .  .  .  xj  li  xviij  s. 

Ite  lent  out  to  Jas  Smy'  conforme  to  ye  contract  ane  thowsand  mark  q''of 
the  foirsd  j'^xxxv]  ll  vj  s.  viij  d.  is  ane  part. 

Suma  of  ye  dischairge  .  .  j^li<^lx.xvj  li  xj  s.  x  d. 

Restis  chairge  and  dischairge  being  calculat       xliiij  li  ij  s.  x  d. 

Qlk  sowme  is  gevin  to  James  Wotherspone  except  iij  li  ij  s.  vj  d.  restand 
in  Jo"  Mwris  hand  and  he  to  be  chargit  y^'with  in  his  nixt  compt. 

It  is  to  be  rememberit  that  ye  sd  Johne  Mure  lait  collecto""  ressavit  na 
anwal  rents  fra  Johne  Love  Dauid  Pollok  Alex''  Campbell  Williame  Crux 
Ezekiell  Montgomrie  Willia  Andersone  Jo°  Scott  and  Johne  Naper. 

Bell.  The  said  day  it  is  statut  and  ordanit  to  tak  doun  the  beU  in  respect  it  is 

brock  and  to  send  it  to  Ed''  to  Ro'  Flemyng  and  ye  deacone  convenar  to  by 
ane  new  ane  of  ane  lytle  mair  quantatie. 

The  poor  in  The  deacone  convenar  deaconis  and  y"'  bretherine  for  guid  reasons  and 

dfschafrgi^        considera'unis  moving  yem  hes  ordanit  and  statut  that  at  na  tyme  heirefter 

bunaiiis.  ^j^y  Qf  yg  poore  'within  y""  hospitall  go  to  buriallis  as  they  wont  to  do  bot  yat 

they  attend  about  ye  hous  quhill  ye  burialls  cum  to  ye  Wynd  held  and  yen 

convoy  ye  corps  to  ye  buriall  place  and  returne  back  to  ye  hous  agane  and 

attend  for  suche  as  sail  be  bestewit  vpoun  yem. 

The  said  day  the  collecto""  is  ordanit  to  give  to  Uk  poor  man  in  ye  hospitall 
xxj  s.  quarterlie  in  augmenta'un  in  respect  of  ye  straitnes  of  tyme  and  dearthe 
of  victuall. 

xxvj  .Vo""  1635. 
Offi'  The  said  day  Williame  Calderwood  is  continuit  offi''  quha  gave  his  aithe 

continwit. 

as  vse  IS. 

Bandis  takin  Nota  Williame  Crawfurdis  band  is  put  in  ye  box  and  Alex''  Campbellis 

pu  in.  ^^j^j  takin  out  and  gevin  to  ye  deacone  convenar  to  be  regrat  and  put  to 
execu'un  and  WUlia  Andersones  band  is  takin  out  also. 

Calderwood.  The  Said  day  ordanis  ye  collecto''  to  by  ane  stand  of    gray    claithis  to 

Andrew  Calderwood  and  to  give  to  vmq'e  ]on  M^Ildowneis  wyf  ane  dollop 
and  to  W™  Calderwood  xxix  s. 


1636]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  177 

The  said  day  ordanis  Artho''  Fischer  ather  to  ly  within  ye  hospitall  and  Fischer, 
attend  better  on  ye  kirk  or  then  to  be  debarrit  ye  hous  altogidder. 

xxiiij  Fe^'  1636. 

The  said  day  it  is  statut  and  ordanit  that  ye  wark  anent  ye  repairing  of  Act  anent 
ye  hospitall  stipill  be  causit  put  forward  be  ye  deacone  convenar  with    all    *■ " 
diligence  in  most  cumlie  forme  according  as  James  Colquhoun  and  Jo"  Boyd 
sail  think  meit. 

The  said  day  ordanis  the  collecto''  to  len  Williame  Wallace  ane  hundrethe  vvalies. 
marks  vpoun  his  awin  band  whill  Mertimes  band  [sic]  to  help  him  to  sow  and 
labor  his  land  in  his  pnt  grait  distress. 

The  said  day  Manasses  Lyll  deacone  of  the  skynneris  halting  maid  com-  Skynneris. 
plant  to  ye  deacone  convenar  deacones  and  y''  bretherine  aganes  Johne  Liper 
hamermane  in  that  laitlie  he  had  vsit  and  frequentit  to  home  poyntis  speciallie 
ribbins  quhilk  is  nawayis  ane  p'  of  his  calling  and  in  doing  q''of  ye  skynneris 
has  aver  bein  heirtofoir  imployit  and  if  it  war  not  prevenit  and  remeidit  in 
t^'me  wald  prove  verie  hurtfull  and  prejudiciall  to  sindrie  of  ye  calling  of  ye 
skynneris  in  respect  y''  ar  sindrie  of  yem  who  leivis  y''by  and  is  na  vy''wayis 
imployit  qlk  complent  being  weill  weyit  ponderit  and  advysit  be  ye  sd  deacone 
convenar  deacones  and  y''  bretherine  the  said  Johne  Liper  being  personallie 
pnt  and  hard  at  lenthe  to  speik  for  himself  the  said  deacone  convenar  deacones 
and  maist  part  of  yf  bretherine  ordanis  the  said  Jo°  Liper  to  desist  and  abstain  ' 

in  all  tyme  heirefter  fra  ye  horning  of  poyntis  ather  of  ribbins  or  leather  to 
any  maner  of  persone  q'sumever  during  his  residence  within  yis  bru'  wnder 
ye  paine  of  ten  pundis  mo^'v  toties  quoties  and  that  for  ye  better  observing 
and  keiping  of  that  love  amitie  and  concord  heirefter  qlk  hes  bein  betuixt 
ye  sds  twa  callingis  heirtofoir. 

Nono  Martij  1636. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacone  convenar  haveing  interrogat  and  proponit  to  Anent  M' 
the  deacones  and  y''  bretherine  (ye  most  p*  yof  being  pnt  and  ye  haill  deacones  pr^senta-unto 
except   Jo°   Boyd  deacone  of  maissounes  and    Patrik   Watsone   deacone  of  the  Biakfriar 
flascho''  quha  war  out  of  ye  toun)  quhat  was  y''  opiniouns  concernyng    ye 
nomina'un  and  electioun  maid  be  ya  provest  baillais  and  cosall  of  this  bru' 
of  M""  Johne  Bell  now  minister  at  Eglishame  to  be  minister  at  ye  Biakfriar 
within  yis  bru'  and  of  ye  presenta'un  grantit  be  yame  to  ye  said  M^  Johne 
Bell  to  that  effect  the  haill  deaconis  pnt  and  y''  bretherine  all  in  ane  voice 
approvit  ye  said  presenta'un  grantit  be  ye  saidis  provest  bailleis  and  cosall 
in  favor's  of  ye  sd  M''  Johne  Bell  to  ye  said  Biakfriar  Kirk  and  becaus  his  edict 
is  to  be  callit  yis  day  in  ye  Metrapolitant  Kirk  they  electit    and    nominat 

M 


178 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1636 


Willia  Neilsone  zonger  W'"  Howie  Johne  Maxwall  deacone  of  hamermen 
Manasses  L}-!!  deacone  of  skynneris  James  Colquhoun  Johne  Mure  deacone 
of  tailzo''  James  Robesone  deacone  of  baxteris  and  Ro'  Snype  deacone  of 
cowperis  to  go  and  attend  ye  calling  of  ye  said  edict  and  to  giv  in  y'  names 
yf  approba^un  to  ye  presenta'un  grantit  in  favors  of  ye  sd  ^I''  Johne  Bell  and 
to  his  admissioun  to  ye  foirsd  functioun  and  chairge. 


Prenteis 
Wilsone. 


xij  Aprilis  1636. 

The  said  day  Johne  Wilsone  sone  law"  to  Alex"'  Wilsone  staibler  is  buikit 
heirin  prenteis  with  Johne  Reid  zonger  armaro''  to  serve  him  sevin  zeiris  con- 
forme  to  ye  indento^  of  ye  dait  ye  nynt  of  Marche  last  bypast. 


Prenteis 
Duncanesone. 


Vltimo  Junij  1636. 

The  said  day  Johne  Duncanesone  sone  naturall  to  vmq^*  James  Dun- 
canesone broy"'  germane  to  Johne  Duncanesone  merchand  is  buikit  heirin  as 
prenteis  with  Williame  Duncane  hamermane  during  ye  space  of  sevin  zeiris 
as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforms  to  ye  indento''  of  ye  dait 
the  first  day  of  Junij  instant. 

Decimo    octauo    Maij    1636. 

The  said  day  ordanis  ye  collector  to  caus  giv  adverteisment  to  My  Gawin 
Hamiltoun  to  renew  his  twa  bands  at  Mertimes  nixt. 


Corslatt  and 
muscattis. 


The  said  day  Niniane  Gilhagie  deacone  convenar  gave  in  to  ye  hospitall 
conforme  to  3'e  ordo'  his  corslet  with  heid  peice  and  craige  peice.  Lykas 
W™  Wilsone  visito''  of  maltmen  W™  Falconer  deacone  of  weiferis  Johne 
Ma.xwall  deacone  of  hamermen  Ro*  Ar'^  deacone  of  3'e  chirurgianes  and  W™ 
Coitts  dekin  of  ye  cordoneris  producit  y'  muscatts  with  bandaleiris  and  stafis 
qlks  ar  ordanit  to  be  hung  vp  with  ye  rest. 


Decimo  Septimo  August]  1636. 

Fischer  and  The  said  day  Robert  Fischer  tailzo^  and  Androw  Gray  cordoner  ar  nominat 

hospitall!''^       and  admitit  be  pluralitie  of  voitis  to  be  put  in  ye  hospitall  in  place  of  \Tnqi6 

ArthC  Fischer  and  Johne  Scott  and  ordanis  them  to  half  y^  allowance  y'in 

conforme  to  ye  ordinar  maner. 


Geddes  and 

Pollok. 


Mur. 


The  said  day  ordanis  the  collecto""  pnt  and  to  cum  to  pay  quarterlie  to 
Johne  Geddes  maltman  and  Johne  Pollok  skynner  fyve  markis  money  for  y^ 
help  and  supplie  ay  and  whill  ye  samynn  be  dischairgit. 

The  said  day  ordanis  the  collecto''  to  len  to  James  Mur  cordoner  for  outred 
of  his  law"  effairis  fourtie  punds  mo^'v  vpoun  his  awin  band  without  cau'un. 


1636]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  179 

Sepiimo  Septembris  1636. 

The  whilk  day  Niniane  Gilhagie  dekine  convenar  with  ye  dekins  of  craftis  Act  anent  the 
within  this  bru'  and  thair  counsall  being  mett  and  convenit  within  y"'  hospital!  hammermen. 
for  the  hairing  of  ana  cartana  complant  maid  ba  Johna  Kirkwood  goldsmytha 
and  certain  wtheris  his  colhgis  bretherine  of  ye  hamermen  anent  certana  abvss 
done  ba  the  pnt  dakina  of  the  hamerman  and  his  maistaris  of  craft  in  prejudice 
of  ye  haill  calUng  and  specialUe  anent  ye  maner  of  ye  alactioun  of  ya  dekine 
quilk  complent  being  rad  Jo"  Maxvvall  present  dekine  of  ye  hamermen  and  his 
haill  maistaris  of  craft  being  wairnit  and  als  pnt  togiddar  with  ye  said  Johne 
Kirkwood  and  his  coUigis  complinaris  and  baith  parteis  being  permittit  to 
speik  for  yemselfis  for  informing  of  ye  said  dekine  convenar  and  remanent 
persones  foirsd  and  to  give  in  y''  bast  overtouris  for  rameiding  of  ya  sds  abvss 
in  ye  sd  calling  baith  the  sds  parteis  being  pnt  apart  efter  consulta-un  had 
with  vy''is  amonges  themselfis  they  all  in  ana  voce  submitit  yemselfs  frilie 
to  the  said  Niniane  Gilhagie  dekine  convenar  remanent  dekins  of  craftis  and 
y''  cosall  quha  having  weUl  weyit  ponderit  and  considerit  ye  sd  complent  the 
said  dekine  convenar  dekins  and  y"^  cosall  concludit  agreit  and  ordanit  that 
ye  sd  Niniane  GOhagie  sould  caus  warne  twelf  persones  to  himself  q^oi  sax 
sail  ba  dekines  of  craftis  and  the  vy's  sex  of  ye  most  famous  honest  men  of  ye 
said  dekin  convanaris  counsall  whom  ha  sail  think  meitest  to  convein  with 
himself  on  that  day  whilk  he  sail  appoynt  for  electioun  of  ye  dekins  of  craftis 
within  this  bru'  for  yis  nixt  zeir  enschewing  and  ha  and  the  saidis  twelf  persones 
being  convenit  and  sworne  sail  half  power  priviledge  and  libartie  to  elect  and 
choys  ana  dekine  to  the  sd  craft  of  hamermen  with  ye  haill  maistaris  of  craft 
according  to  ye  nwmber  vsit  and  wont  of  the  best  and  worthiest  out  of  the 
haiD  bretherine  of  ye  sd  calling  and  the  dekine  and  maisteris  being  so  electit 
be  yem  sail  be  buikit  in  ye  craftis  bulk  and  ressavit  be  ya  haill  bretherine  of 
ye  calling  as  dekin  and  maisters  of  craft  for  this  zair  nixt  enschewing  and  this 
act  to  stand  in  force  for  this  zeir  allanerlie  and  nawayis  to  be  any  farder 
derogative  or  prejudicial!  to  ye  bretherine  of  ye  said  calling  anent  ye  priviledge 
grantit  to  yem  hairtofoir  be  y""  Ira  of  dekinheid  for  electing  and  choysing  of 
y''  dekin  and  maisteris  of  craft  conforme  to  auld  vse  and  wont  qlk  conclusioun 
and  ordinance  being  red  to  baith  ye  sds  parteis  they  war  wail!  content  ywith 
and  promeist  faithfullia  to  stand  yto. 

Duodecimo  Ociobris  1636. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  with  the  deacones  and  y"'  bretherine  Presenta'un 
being  convenit  within  thair  hospital!  for  electing  of  twa  of  y^  number  to  be  coMvenar. 
pntit  on  lytt  with  himself  to  ye  provest  bailleis  and  counsall  of  this  bru*  to 
the  effect  ane  of  yem  might  be  electit  dekine  convenar  for  this  zeir  to  cum 
be  pluralitie  of  voitis  Walter  Dowglas  and  Johne  Andersone  cordoner  callit 


i8o 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1636 


Gilhagie 

dekine 

convenor. 


bailleis  Jo°  ar  ordanit  to  be  pntit  on  lytt  with  Niniane  Gilhagie  pnt  deacone 
convenar  to  ye  effect  foirsd  and  the  samyn  lytts  to  be  pntit  be  Henrie  Robesone 
and  Robert  Horner. 

Thairefter  the  said  Niniane  Gilhagie  is  continwit  deacone  convenar  for 
ane  zeir  to  cum. 


Decimo  tertio  Odobris  1636. 

Electioun  The  Said  day  Niniane  Andersone  Gawin  Neisbit  Jo"  Andersone  elder  and 

deaneofgiid     James  Colquhouo  ar  be  pluralitie  of  voitis  electit  and  nominat  to  sit  on  the 
his  coiifisaii.      deane  of  gild  his  counsell  as  the  four  ordinar  appoyntit  for  the  crafts  rank 
for  this  zeir  to  cum. 

The  said  day  thir  persones  following  ar  electit  and  choysin  to  be  on  the 
deane  of  gild  his  counsall  for  ye  zeir  to  cum  and  first  ye  deacones. 


X  Henrie  Robesone 
xjohne  Listoun 
X  Robert  Horner 
X  Patrik  Bar 
Gabriell  Heriott 
Thomas  Andersone 
George  Lochheid 


James  Rankein 
X  Robert  Mure 

Williame  Wilsone 

Robert  Archibald 
X  Alex''  Colquhoun 

Thomas  Naismy' 

David  Jack  extraordinar 


Williame  Neilsone  baillie 


X  Johne  Duncane 
X  Johne  Maxvvall 
xAdame  Nicoll 

Niniane  Andersone 
x  Johne  Andersone  elder 
Jo"  Andersone  zounger 
Richard  Allane 
Williame  Coittis 

Gawin  Neisbit 
Johne  Mure 
James  Ogilvie 
Rot  Boyd 

Thomas  Scott 
James  Robesone 


Walter  Dowglas 
\Y'ra  Neilsone  elder 
James  Wotherspone 
Walter  Neilsone 
Ro'  Patersone 
Johne  Gilhagie 

Robert  Snype 
George  Lyoun 

X  Patrik  Colquhoun 
James  Colquhoun 
Jo"  Baird 
Johne  Boyd 
W™  Falconer 
Manasses  Lyll 
James  Padie 
Patrik  Watsone 


1636]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  iSi 

W'ni  Howie 
Dauid  Howie 
Jo"  M^Ewin 
George  Mur 

xxviij  Odobris   1636. 

The  said  daj'  Williame  Crux  band  Macolme  Crawfurds  band  Johne  Lovis  Bands  gevin 
band  and  Gawin  Neisbits  band  ar  gevin  out  to  James  Wotherspone  coUecto''  °"  ' 
to  be  put  to  execu'un. 

The  said  day  W'"  Zair  clerk  and  James  Wotherspone  coUecto''  ar  both  clerk  and 
contenit  to  ye  nixt  electioun  quha  gav  y  aithis  as  vse  is.  contSiwit. 

xxiij  Novembris  1637  [?  6]. 

The  said  day  James  Wotherspone  collector  maid  his  compt  of  his  intro- 
missioun  with  ye  guids  belonging  to  ye  hospitall  q''of  chairge  and  dischairge 
followis. 

Chairge. 

In  the  first  receavit  be  him  fra  ye  last  collector  at  ye  makeing  of  ye  last  zeiris 

comptis  .  .  .  .  .  .  xlj  ll  iiij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  Johne  Andeisone  of  burgess  silver  for  the  zeir  1635     xxiij  ll 
Item  fra  Johne  Andersone  merchand  of  prin"  sowme  at  Mertimes  1635 

Ixvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Mair  for  ye  anwal  rent  thairof  fra  Mertimes  1634  to  ye  said  terme 

v]  ll  xii]  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  fra  Sir  Thomas  Boyd  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  ij'^  ll  twa  zeiris  preceading 

Mertimes  1635  .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  ll 

Item  fra  Dauid  Colquhoun  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  v<=  merkis  fra  Mertimes  1634 

to  Mertimes  1635         ....  xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  Johne  Baird  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  ij<=  merkis  ye  said  zeir 

xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  fra  James  Scheilis  for  the  anwal  of  ]'^  merkis  the  said  zeir 

vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  fra  Ezekeill  Montgomrie  for  the  anwall  of  iiijf^  merkis  fra  ye  said  terme  of 

Mertimes  1634  to  Mertimes  1635  .  .  xxvj  ti  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  Silvertounhill  for  ye  anwall  of  v'=  ll  ane  zeir  and  ane  half  viz  Witsunday 

and  Mertimes  termes  1635  and  Witsunday  last  .  .  Ixxv  ll 

Item  fra  W'  Ninian  Campbell  for  ye  anwall  of  j''  li  the  termes  of  Mertimes  1635 

and  Witsunday  1636  .  .  .  .  .  .  x  li 

Item  fra  Dauid  Pollok  of  prin"  sowme  at  Witsunday  last    j^xxxiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Mair  fra  him  for  the  anwall  y^'of  ye  termes  of  Witsunday  and  Mertimes  1634, 

1635  and  Witsunday  last         .  .  .  xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 


i82  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1636 

Item  fra  Johne  Love  for  ye  anwall  of  ij<=  merkis  ye  Witsunday  and  Mertimes 
termes  1635     .....  xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  Macolme  Crawfurd  for  ye  anwall  of  v^^  merkis  ye  Witsunday  and  Mer- 
times termes  1635  ^^d  Witsunday  1636  .  .  .  1  ll 

Item  fra  M''  Gawin  Hamiltone  for  ye  anwall  of  iiij'^  li  ye  termes  of  W'itsunday 
and  Mertimes  1635      .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  ll 

Item  fra  Richard  Allane  of  prin"  sowme  at  Mertimes  1635  .  v<=  li 

Mair  fra  him  for  ye  anwall  ^'''of  ye  terme  of  Mertimes  1635        .  xxv  li 

Item  fra  William  and  Walt  Ly'bodies  for  ye  anwal  of  ijc  li  the  termes  of  Mer- 
times and  Whitsunday  1635      .  .  .  .  .  xx  ll 

Item  fra  Walter  Neilsone  of  prin"  sowme  at  Witsunday  1636   .  ij''  tl 

Mair  fra  him  for  the  anwal  rent  y'of  ye  Mertimes  terme  1635  and  W'itsunday 
terme  last       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  xx  ll 

Item  receavit  fra  Alex''  Campbell  for  twa  zeiris  arent  of  iiij''  ll  preceading 
Mertimes  1635  ......  Ixxx  ll 

Item  ressauit  of  anwal  rent  for  fyve  hundrethe  markis  as  ane  pairt  of  ye  fyve 
hundrethe  pund  whilk  was  gottin  fra  Richard  Allane  fra  Mertimes  1635 
to  Witsunday  last        .  .  .  .  xvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Qi'of  twa  hundrethe  merks  y^'of  also  was  lent  out  at  Mertimes  1635. 

Item  ressauit  fra  James  Smyth  for  ye  anwall  of  j^J  merks  fra  Witsunday  1635 
to  Mertimes  y'eft         ....  xxxiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Nota  ye  foirsaid  prin"  sowme  was  lent  to  Tourgill  at  ye  sd  terme  of  Mertimes 

1635- 
Item  ressauit  fra  ve  deacones         .  .  .  j'^lxijli  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xls. 

xxxix  ll  xij  s, 

xiiij  li  xvij  s.  iiij  d. 

xij  ll  viij  s. 


Item  fra  Andro  Lyll 

Item  fra  Mathow  Ker 

Item  of  money  gottin  for  mortclaithes 

Item  with  ye  superplus  of  ye  daUlis 


Suiha  of  ye  haill  charge  is 

ane    thousand    seavin    hundrethe    threttie    aucht    punds 
seavintein  schilingis  aucht  permis. 

Discharge. 

In  the  first  debursit  for  stones  and  leading  y^of  to  the  pyrameit  whaiiin  the 
bell  hingis       .....  xxix  t  xv  s.  ij  d. 

Item  for  lyme  and  sand     .....  viij  ll  v  s. 

Item  for  yorne  wark  and  nailis  conforme  to  ane  particular  compt 

x.xxv  ll  iiij  s.  ij  d. 

Item  to  ye  maissounes  conforme  to  ane  particular  compt     j^^lxv  li  xij  s.  ij  d. 

Item  to  barrowmen  .  .  .  .  ix  ll  xv  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  ye  wry''^  for  fyloring  ye  out  scho'  dreissing  y''of  and  making  of  ye 
window  brodis  ....  xxxv  ll  iiij  s.  ij  d. 


1637J       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  183 

Item  for  lead  .  .  .  .  .  vij  ll  xiij  s.  vj  d. 

Item  for  chaines    ......  viij  ll  viij  s. 

Item  the  haill  rest  of  ye  discharge  what  ye  counter  had  debursit  wpon  ye 
sustenta'un  of  the  puir  within  the  hospitall  furnisching  of  cloathcs  to 
them  coaUs  and  peitis  and  what  he  had  debursit  to  ye  ordinar  stipenderis 
and  to  vyr  dekait  persones  conforme  to  warrandis  producit  with  what 
ye  counter  had  debursit  wpon  ye  expenss  of  ye  funeralis  of  thes  wha 
depairtit  this  lyf  in  the  hous  the  zeir  preceiding  and  what  he  debursit 
to  ye  colledge  collector  and  vther  fialis  being  all  calculat  laid  and  allowit 
the  haill  discharg  is  fund  to  extend  to         viij"^  four  scoir  vj  ll  viij  s.  x  d. 

Sua  charge  and  discharg  being  calculat  the  cownter  restis  awand 
in  ...  .  .  viiiit^lii  ll  viij  s.  x  d. 

Quhairof  ye  counter  exoneris  himself  be  bandis  producit  and  put  in  the  coffer  of 

viiji^xxxix  ll  v)  s.  viij  d. 
And  sua  ye  counter  restis  awand  in  .  .  xiij  ll  ij  s.  iiij  d. 

And  ordaines  him  to  be  chargit  thairwith  at  his  nixt  compt. 

Nota  Richard  Allane  hes  maid  na  compt  of  ye  last  zeiris  burges  silver. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  conveinar  haill  deacones  and  thair  britherine  Anent  pay'  of 
for  good  causs  moveing  them  hes  statut  and  ordanit  that  the  officeris  fie  qlk  heirefter. 
of  old  was  payit  be  ye  deacones  sail  be  payit  be  ye  collecto''  zeirly  heirefter 
and  ordanes  ye  deacones  to  mak  payment  of  y^  pairtis  y^of  conforme  to  old 
vs  and  vont  at  ye  feist  of  Witsunday  zeirly  thairefter. 

Nota  thair  is  takin  out  of  ye  box  ye  bandis  following  and  ar  gevin  to  ye  Bands  takin 
deacon  conveinar  to  be  put  to  executioun  viz  S'  Thomas  Boydis  band  Gavin  °"'' 
Neisbitis  band  Charles  PoUookis  band  Johne  Lowes  band  and  Macum  Craw- 
furdis  band. 

Quarto  Januarij  1637. 

The  said  day  Ritchart  Allane  producit  ye  money  was  receavit  be  him  fra  MemorandMfji. 
ye  burgess  and  gild  brether  extending    to   xxxiiij  ll  xiiij  s.  qlk  is  geavin  to 
the  collecto''  and  ordaines  him  to  be  chargit  thairwith  at  ye  makeing  of  his 
nixt  compt. 

The  said    day  ordaines  the  collector  to  pay  to  Johne  Boyd  maissoun  VVarrand. 
tuentie  pundis  for  his  paines  takin  at  ye  building  of  ye  pirameit  wher  the  bell 
hingis  and  fourtie  schilingis  restand  to  him  of  ane  old  compt  for  dressing  of 
sum  lang  staines. 

The  said  day  Johne  Geddes  maltman  is  admitit  and  receavit    in    the  Geddes 
hospitall  to  be  susteanit  y''in  with  ye  rest  of  ye  puir  and  ordaines  Johne  Wyllie    °^'"  ^ 
cowper  to  haif  ye  tuentie  marks  zeirlie  was  wont  to  be  payit  to  ye  sd  Johne 
Geddes. 


184 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1637 


Prenteis 

M'MiUane. 


Prenteis 
Thomesone. 


M'Gibboun 
preDteis. 


Muskattis. 


Pnta'un  lyttis 
to  be  dekin 
convenar. 


Richard 
Allane  dekin 
convenar. 


Decimo  qitinto  Februarij  1637. 

The  whilk  day  the  deacone  convenar  deacones  and  thair  bretherine  all 
in  ane  voice  for  certane  reasones  and  considera'uns  moving  them  hes  ordanit 
thair  collecto''s  pnt  and  to  cum  to  pay  to  Williame  Zair  thair  clerk  during  his 
service  to  yem  ten  markis  mo^y  of  augmenta~un  zeirlie  with  ye  ordinar  auld 
fiall. 

Vigesimo  Fe^>  1637. 

The  said  day  Alex'  M^Millane  brother  german  to  Angus  M^Millane  servito' 
to  ane  noble  and  potent  lord  Ar''  Lorde  of  Lome  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with 
James  Stirling  tailzo"'  burges  of  this  bru'  to  serve  him  savin  zeiris  as  prenteis 
and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indento"'  maid  y^anent  of  ye 
dait,  at  Glasgw  ye  secund  day  of  Fe^^'J  instant. 

Vigesimo  Octauo  Aprilis  1637. 

The  said  day  \\'iUiame  Thomesone  sone  law^i  to  vmq'^  Alex''  Thomesone 
in  Casiltoun  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Thomas  Hutchesone  litster  during 
ye  space  of  sevin  zeiris  conforme  to  ye  indento''  of  the  dait  of  thir  pntis. 

Quarto  Octobris  1637. 

The  qlk  day  Johne  M^Gibboun  sone  law"  to  wrnq'^  Johne  M'^^Gibboun 
mariner  burges  of  this  bru'  is  buikit  heirin  as  prenteis  with  Johne  Gray  taOzo' 
burges  yof  to  serve  his  said  m'  as  prenteis  during  the  space  of  sevin  zeiris 
and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  as  they  can  agrie  conforme  to  ye  indento''  of 
ye  dait  ye  twentie  aught  day  of  Julij  jajvic  threttie  fyve  zeiris. 

Apud  Glasgow  decimo  octavo  August j  1637. 

The  qlk  day  Henrie  Robesone  Gabriell  Heriott  and  George  Lochheid  pntit 
yf  three  muskatis  with  stafis  and  bandileiris  qlk  ar  all  acceptit  and  ordanit  to 
be  hung  wp  with  the  rest. 

Vndecimo  Octobris  1637. 

The  said  day  Niniane  Gilhagie  dikine  convenar  with  ye  dekins  and  y^ 
counsall  being  for  the  most  convenit  in  y'  hospitall  did  elect  the  three  persones 
foOowing  viz  Johne  Andersone  elder  Richard  Allane  cordoneris  and  James 
Colquhoun  wry'  to  be  pntit  to  ye  provest  bailleis  and  counsall  of  this  bru* 
be  Johne  Mur  dekine  of  tailzo's  and  Ro'  Finlay  dekine  of  cordoneris  to  ye 
effect  ane  of  them  might  be  electit  dekine  convenar  for  ye  zeir  to  cum. 

Thairefter  the  said  Richard  is  electit  dekin  convenar  for  ye  zeir  to  cum 
and  he  maid  choys  of  ye  persones  following  to  be  on  his  counsall  for  ye  zeir 
to  cum  and  ordanis  them  to  be  wairnit  agens  ye  morne. 


1637]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


rS5 


Duodecimo  Octobris  1637. 
Dekins 


Thomas  Myllar 
Robert  Finlay 
Johne  Mure 
Manasses  Lyll 
Johne  Bochannane 
Patrik  Clerk 
James  Pollok 


James  Rankein 

Willia  Reid 

Jo°  Gilhagie 

M"'  James  Hamiltoun 

Robert  Fynnie 

WilHa  Govane 

Johne  Woddrow 


Niniane  Andersone  bailHe 


Henrie  Robesone 
Wilha  Stalker 
Johne  Kirkvvood 

Jo°  Andersone  elder 
Jo"!  Listoun 
Jo°  Andersone  zounger 
W"  Finlay 

Gawin  Neisbit 
Ro'  Horner 
James  Ogilvie 

Patrik  Bar 
James  Padie 

Thomas  Scott 
James  Robesone 
Gabriell  Heriott 

Thomas  Andersone 

George  Lochheid 
George  Lyoun 
Rot  Pollok  elder 


Johne  Hall 

Johne  Boyd 
Ro*  Cauldwall 

Rot  Mur 

Patrik  Colquhoun 

James  Colquhoun 

Walter  Dowglas 
Williame  Neilsone  elder 
Williame  Neilsone  zounger 
Niniane  Gilhagie 
Willia  Wilsone 
Ro'  Patersone 
Walter  Neilsone 
James  Wotherspone 
Alex'^  Colquhoun 
George  Mure 
Willia  Howie 
Dauid  Howie 
Jo°  M^Ewin 


Qlks  persones  being  all  present  (except  Manasses  Lyll  Johne  Kirkwood 
Jo"  Andersone  zounger  Walter  Dowglas  Alex''  Colquhoun  George  Mur  W™ 
Howie)  acceptit  ye  sd  office  in  and  wpoun  them  and  gave  y  aithe  as  vse  is. 


i86 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1637 


Lynaeris.  The  Said  day  Willia  Neilsone  zounger  Johne  Andersone  elder  Niniane 

Gilhagie  and  Patrik  Colquhoun  be  pluralitie  of  voitis  ar  electit  to  sit  on  ye 
deane  of  gild  his  counsall  for  ye  zeir  to  cum  for  ye  four  craftis  men  appoyntit 
to  sit  yon  conforme  to  ye  Ire  of  gUdrie. 


CoUecto'. 


Clerk  and  ofli' 
coQtinwit. 


Keis. 


Band  takin 
out. 


Apud  Glasgow  prima  Novemhris  1637. 

The  quhilk  day  Robert  Findlay  deacone  of  cordoneris  is  electit  collector 
for  ane  zeir  to  cum  quha  being  pnt  acceptit  ye  sd  office  in  and  wpoun  him  and 
gave  his  aithe  as  vse  is. 

The  said  day  ye  dark  and  officer  is  continowed  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  quha 
gave  of  new  thair  aithe  as  vse  is. 

The  said  day  the  keis  of  ye  box  ar  givin  in  keiping  to  Johne  Listoun 
Thomas  Mj-llar  and  Johne  GUhagie. 

The  said  day  James  Boydis  band  of  four  hundreth  punds  is  takine  out 
of  ye  box  and  givin  to  ye  collector  to  be  put  to  executioun. 


Decimo  quinto  Novemhris  1637. 

Bands  The   quhilk   day   Niniane   Gilhagie  lait   deacone  convenar   producit   the 

producit.  j^^-^j  Yi3,ndis  out  takin  be  him  conteanit  in  the  act  sett  doun  ye  xxiij  day  of 

November  1636. 

The  quhilk  day  James  Wotherspone  lait  collector  maid  his  compt  of  his 
last  zeirs  intromissioun  q^of  charge  and  discharge  followis. 

Item  receavit  fra  Johne  Luif  for  his  twa  hundrethe  marks  fra  Mertmes  1635 
till  Mertmes  1636         .  .  •  ■  x  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  Macolme  Crawfurd  for  his  fyve  hunthethe  marks  fra  Witsonday  1636 
to  Witsonday  1637      ....  xxvj  I1  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  Gavin  Nisbitt  for  ye  anwal  rent  of  fyve  hundrethe  punds  fra  Mertmes 

1635  to  Mertmes  1636  .....        xxxxvll 
Item  fra  Sir  Thomas  Boyd  for  his  twa  hundrethe  punds  fra  Mertmes  1635  till 

Witsonday  1637  ......         xxvj  ll 

Item  fra  Sir  Robert  HaiTiilton  for  his  fyve  hundrethe  punds  fra  Witsonday 

1636  till  Witsonday  1637         .  .  .  •  .  xl  1 
Item  fra  Ezechiell  Mountgomrie  for  his  four  hundrethe  marks  fra  Mertimes 

1635  till  Mertimes  1636  .....        xxiiij  li 

Item  fra  Charles  Pollook  for  his  twa  hundrethe  punds  fra  Witsonday  1635  till 

Witsonday  1637  .  .  .  .  •  •  2,^^ 

Item  fra  Johne  Baird  for  his  twa  hundrethe  marks  fra  Mertimes  1635   till 

Mertimes  1636  .  .  .  •  •  .  xij  ll 


1637]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


1S7 


Item  fra  Maister  Niniane  Campbell  for  his  ane  hundrethe  punds  fra  Witsonday 

1636  to  Witsonday  1637  .....  viij  ti 

Item  fra  James  Scheillis  for  his  ane  hundrethe  marks  fra  Mertimes  1635  till 

Mertimes  1636  .  .  .  .  .     vj  tl  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  William  and  Walter  Lichtbodies  for  thair  twa  hundrethe  punds  fra 

Mertimes  1635  to  Witsonday  1637         ....        xxvj  ll 
Item  fra  Androw  Lyll  for  his  fourty  pundis  .  .  .  2  ll 

Item  fra  Dauid  Colquhoun  for  his  fyve  hundrethe  marks  fra  Mertimes  1635  to 

Mertimes  1636  ....  xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  William  Crawfurd  for  his  ane  hundrethe  marks  fra  Mertimes  1635 

till  Mertimes  1636        .  .  .  .  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  Robert  Boyd  of  Tovvrgill  for  ye  anwall  of  ane  thowsand  marks  for 

ye  termes  of  Mertimes   1636   and   Witsonday   1637       Iiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  fra  James  Witherspone  for  his  fyve  hundrethe  marks  fra  Witsonday 

1636  till  Witsonday  1637         .  .  .  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  M"'  James  FuUartoun  for  his  twa  hundrethe  punds  fra  Witsonday 

1636  till  Mertimes  1636  .....  viij  ll 

Item  fra  Robert  Sempill  for  his  twa  hundrethe  marks  fra  Mertimes  1635  till 

Mertimes  1636  ....  xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  Niniane  Andersone  for  his  fyve  hundrethe  punds  fra  the  dait  of  his 

band  till  Mertimes  1637 
Item  fra  the  exeris  of  vmq"  George  Muir 
Item  fra  James  Trane  for  ventar  tar 
Item  receavit  for  ye  poore  for  thair  p'  of  ye  out  wallit  daillis 
Item  fra  Ritchart  Allane  of  burges  silver 
Item  fra  George  Muir 
Item  fra  Robert  Hairiilton 
Item  fra  Mathow  Ker 

Item  fra  James  Smythe  for  his  ane  hundrethe  marks  half 
Item  fra  ye  smythes 
Item  fra  ye  tailzo^'s 
Item  fra  ye  cordoneris 
Item  from  the  maltmen 
Item  fra  the  wobsteris 
Item  fra  ye  skinneris 
Item  fra  the  cowperis 
Item  fra  ye  wry'^  . 
Item  fra  ye  maisounes 
Item  fra  ye  baxteris 
Item  fra  ye  gairdneris 
Item  fra  the  bonettmakeris 
Item  fra  ye  flescho''s 
Item  fra  ye  litsteris 


XV  ll 

.     vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

vj  ll 

s       xj  ll  iij  s.  iiij  d. 

xxxiiij  ll  xiiij  s. 

ij  ll  xiiij  s. 

ij  ll  xiiij  s. 

xlj  ll 

f      ij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

XX  tl 

XX  ll 

XX  ll 

XXX  ll 

xH 

xH 

viij  ll 

viij  ll 

iiij  ll 

.     vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

iij  ll  vj  s.  iiij  d. 

ij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

xt 

.     vj  ll 

xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

i88  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1637 

Item  restand  of  his  last  zeirs  compt  .  .  .       xiij  ll  i]  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  of  burgess  silver         .  .  .  .  .     xv  li  xij  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  ye  mortclaith       .  .  .  .  .  x  ll  xj  s. 

Item  receavit  fra  Silvertounhill  of  prin^'  sowme     .  .  .  v^  li 

Item  payit  be  ye  collector  quhilk  he  was  avvin  in  be  his  band 

iii<=xxxiii  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  W™  Crawfurd  in  Partick  of  prin'i  sowme     Ixvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  ye  arent  y''of  fra  Mertimes  1636  to  Mertimes  last  was  v  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  receavit  be  him  fra  Maister  Gavin  Hainilton  for  the  arent  of  four  hun- 

drethe  punds  .......        xxxij  t 

Summa  of  ye  haill  charge  is 

ane  thowsand  sex  hundrethe  Ixv  punds  auchtein  schilings. 


Discharge. 

In  the  first  debursit  for  coallis        ....         xiij  ll  v  s.  ij  d. 

Item  for  ane  kist  and  winding  scheit  to  vmq"  Laurance  Schaw  iij  li 

Item  to  Johne  Boyd  for  attending  ye  warkmanschip  of  pirameitt  quhairin 
the  bell  hingis  ......  x.xij  ll 

Item  to  Patrik  Colquhoun  for  ane  quheill  to  ye  bell  .  .  iij  ll 

Item  to  James  Smythe  for  roodis  and  boltis  thairto  .  .  v-  li 

Item  to  Robert  Flem3'ng  quhilk  he  debursit  bituLxt  ye  old  bell  and  the  new 
bell     ......  xviij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  for  hom  bringing  y^of  .  .  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Item  to  ye  dark  for  his  fie  .  .  .  .  .  xx  ll 

Item  givin  to  Walter  Dowglas  wyf  that  was  adebtit  to  hir  sine  Johne  Andersone 
was  last  deacone  conveinar      .  .  .  .  .  iij  ll 

Item  givin  to  Hew  Elphingstoun  bituixt  new  glas  and  old  glas  to  ye  windowis 

xxxvj  s. 

Item  for  cloathe  to  be  cloathis  to  John  Geddes      .  .    xv  ll  viij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  claithe  to  be  breiks  to  Johne  Gairdner     .  .  ij  ll  viij  s. 

Item  for  making  of  Johne  Geddes  cloathis  and  ye  said  Johne  Gairdner  his 
breiks  .......        xxxij  s. 

Item  givin  out  for  aucht  laid  of  peits         .  .  .  xxj  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  conforme  to  ane  particular  warrand  givin  to  Johne  Mony  Alan  Steinsoun 
Findlaw  Schakschaw  Johne  Wyllie  Charles  Snype  Dauid  Mj-llar  Johne 
Wilsone  viver  Johne  Kirlie  Robert  Glasgow  and  Thomas  Merschell 

.xviij  li  X  s. 

Item  debursit  wpon  ane  vther  warrand  to  thir  persounes  viz  to  vmq'i  Alexander 
Cauldwallis  wyf  William  Howstoun  Johne  Birscatt  William  Gib  Androw 
Calderwood  James  Cauldwall  Thomas  Southerland  Dauid  Laislie  Johne 
Dalrimpill  Johne  Currie  John  Bowie  .  .  .\.xv  ll  ij  s. 


1637]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  189 

Item  be  ane  vther  warrand  debursit  to  thir  persownes  viz  the  saids  John  Currie 
Jonat  Calderwood  Johne  Wilsone  Robert  Patersone  wry'  James  ScheilHs 
cordoner  Wilham  Liggett  Johne  Bowie  WilHam  ScheiUis  James  Rodger 
W"  Gib  Mareon  Dunlop  Thomas  Merschell  WilHam  Howstoun  Johne 
Ligett  ......  xxj  I1  iiij  s. 

Item  debursit  to  thir  persounes  viz  ye  saids  Dauid  Laislay  William  Howstoun 
W">  Liggett  Ritchart  Donaldsone  William  Gib  Archibald  Patersoun  Johne 
Flemyng  Jeane  Maxvell  Mathow  Dorroche  John  Dalrimpill  Androw 
Calderwood  Ro'  Glasgow  ....  xix  ll  x  s. 

Item  givin  to  Dauid  Wilsone  Johne  Pollock  and  Johne  Wyllie  the  three  ordinar 
penchioners  equali  amongist  thame     .  .  .  .  xl  1 

Item  to  ye  poor  men  in  the  hous  ....  j^^lxxxxij  ll 

Item  for  bed  cloathes  to  Johne  Geddes      ....  iiij  li 

Item  to  Gilbert  Maxwell  for  poynting  of  ye  hous  .  .  .  iiij  li 

Item  for  thrie  laidis  of  lyme  .  .  .  .  .  xv  s. 

Item  William  Drumound  for  bands  ringis  to  windowis  and  flouring  naills 

iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  Mathow  Ker  for  ane  pair  of  schone  .  .         jli  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  for  strae  to  ye  poor  menis  bedis         .  .  .  •    j  li  xvj  s. 

Item  for  lyning  to  Johne  Geddes  cloathes  .  .  jli  xvj  s.  vj  d. 

Item  for  lyning  to  Johne  Gairdneris  cloathes  .  .  .  xvj  s. 

Item  debursit  for  the  registra'un  of  Macolme  Crawfurd  and  S''  Thomas  Bodis 
bands  .......  viij  ll 

Item  givin  to  M""  Johne  Herbertsone  ye  colledge  collector  for  Maister  Johne 
Howiesons  bursour      ....  Ixvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  debursit  to  W™  Calderwood  for  skouring  of  ye  musquettis         liiij  s. 

Hair  to  him  to  help  to  pay  his  hous  maill  .  .  .  iiij  li 

Mair  to  him  att  twa  vther  severall  tymes  .  .  .  liiij  s. 

Mair  to  him  for  twa  pair  of  schone  .  .  .  Iiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Mair  to  him  att  ane  vther  tyme     .....        xxvij  s. 

Item  ye  comptar  dischargis  himself  with  the  sowme  following  debursit  be  him 
wpon  bandis  producit  and  put  in  ye  box  viz  ye  sowme  of  fyve  hundrethe 
punds  conteanit  in  ane  band  grantit  be  Ninian  Andersone  zounger  merchand 
Item  ye  sowme  of  fyve  hundrethe  marks  conteanit  in  ane  band  grantit  be 
William  Noble  of  Nobilsferme  and  his  caul's  Item  of  ye  sowme  of  fourtie 
punds  conteanit  in  ane  band  grantit  be  Maister  Thom.as  Stewart  and 
his  cau''  extending  in  the  haill  to  ye  sowme  of    viij<=lxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Suma  of  the  haill  discharge  is  .      j^liiijclviij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Swa  charge  and  discharge  being  calculat  quhilk  the  comptar  restis  awand 
in  quhairof  thair  is  deducit  of  him  for  his  extraordinari  paines  tuelf  punds 
fyve  schillings  aucht  pennis  and  swa  ye  comptar  is  to  pay  to  ye  collector  twa 


igo 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1637 


hundrethe  fourtie  four  punds  and  ordaines  ye  collector  to  be  chargit  thairwith 
att  his  nixt  compt  and  the  comptar  to  be  dischargit  he  makand  payment  of 
ye  sowme  abovewryttine. 

Notatocharge  j^e  Said  day  ordaines  ye  collector  to  be  chargit  at  his  nixt  compt  making 

with  fyftie  marks  moey  vpliftit  be  him  fra  James  Smythe  in  satisfactioun  of 
his  hundrethe  marks  band. 


Bandis  takine 
out. 


The  said  day  ye  bands  fallowing  ar  takine  out  of  ye  box  and  givin  to  ye 
collector  to  be  put  to  executioun  viz  Sir  Thomas  Boydis  band  Macolme  Craw- 
furds  band  and  Gawin  Nisbittis  band. 


Septimo  Fehruarij  1638. 

The  quhilk  day  James  Braidwood  sone  law"  to  vmq"  Johne  Braidwood 
in  Cambuslang  is  buikit  heirin  as  prentice  to  James  Braidwood  barbo''  burges 
of  this  bru'  to  serve  him  seawin  zeirs  as  prentice  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and 
fie  conforme  to  ye  indentor  sett  doun  bituixt  y™  thairanent  of  ye  dait  ye  last 
day  of  Januari)  last  bypast. 


Homer 
bursour. 


Howstoun. 


Bandis. 


Decimo  Fehruarij  1638. 

The  whilk  day  the  dekine  convenar  dekins  and  thair  bretherine  of  counsall 
hes  gevin  and  grantit  to  Johne  Horner  sone  law"  to  Robert  Horner  tailzo' 
burges  of  this  bru'  the  first  vacand  place  of  bursarie  within  the  colleg  yof  at 
y  gift  and  presenta~un  to  be  susteinit  yin  duiing  ye  spac  of  four  zeiris  he 
being  fund  qualifeit  and  if  not  desyris  the  prin"  and  regentis  to  mak  report 
to  yem  yof  to  ye  effect  ane  wther  mair  qualifeit  may  be  presentit  yto. 

The  said  day  it  is  statut  concludit  and  ordanit  that  William  Howstoun 
tailzo"^  receive  fra  ye  collector  pnt  and  to  cum  fyve  marks  money  quarterlie 
during  his  lyfty  wnles  ye  same  be  dischargit  and  to  begin  pntlie  for  this  Candil- 
mes  last. 

The  said  day  James  Boyds  band  is  put  of  new  agane  in  the  box  with  ane 
new  band  renwit  be  S''  Thomas  Boyd. 


Decimo  quito  Augustj  1638. 

Bandis.  jhe  Said   day  y  is  put  in   ye   box  ane  band  grantit  be  Jo"  Andersone  for 

fyve  hundrethe  marks  and  ane  wy  band  grantit  be  M""  James  FoUonoun  of 
wther  fyve  hundrethe  marks  and  this  was  maid  out  with  ye  fyve  hundrethe 
punds  was  receavit  in  fra  Niniane  Andersone  and  ane  band  of  three  hundrethe 
marks  was  awin  be  ye  sd  M""  James  and  ye  rest  is  left  in  the  box. 


1638]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  191 

The  said  day  anent  the  bill  of  complaint  givin  in  be  James  Ingrahame  Decreit  anent 
Allan    Steinsone    Johnne    Smythe    Andrew    Pettigrew    Robert    Muir    Johnne 
Murdoche  Gabriell  Allansone  and  Mairtein  Bull  cowpeiis  burgess  of  this  bru* 
against  James  Pollook  pnt  deacone  of  ye  cowperis  thairof  makand  mentioun 
that  quhair  of  old  the  custome  of  ye  calling  was  that  the  haill  ventour  guidis 
stappis  rungis  stingis  and  vtheris  belonging  to  the  said  traide  and  vocatioun 
quhilk  was  imbrought  to  the  samein  be  watter  war  equallie  delt  to  the  poor 
of  the  said  vocatioun  als  weill  as  to  the  richt  for  thair  equall  good  and  como- 
ditie  without  respect  of  persone  and  now  of  lait  zeiris  the  specialls  and  od 
men  of  the  sd  traide  combynyng  togidder  and  working  to  vtheris  handis  all 
togidder  neglecting  the  estait  of  the  poor  britherine  of  the  sd  calling  hes  peice 
and  peice  introducit  and  brought  in  ane  evill  and  filthie  abuse  and  corruptioun 
quhilk  is  this,  they  have  been  in  vse  thir  divers  zeiris  bygaine  that  ilk  ane 
of  the  sd  speciall  men  of  the  said  vocatioun  takis  to  thameselffis  of  the  saidis 
ventour  guidis  of  the  qualitie  abovewryttine  sumtymes  thrie  tymes  and  vther 
tymes  four  tymes  als  mutch  as  they  give  to  ony  ane  of  the  poor  britherine  of 
ye  sd  calling  and  att  vther  tymes  will  bestow  na  pairt  att  all  vpon  som  of  the 
saidis  poor  britherine  nor  zit  will  cause  warne  thame  conforme  to  the  ordour 
quhen  any  guid  or  od  bargane  is  brought  in  as  said  is  and  be  this  meanis  the 
poor  ar  neglectit  and  grait  grudge  and  angir  raisit  amongest  the  britherine 
thairby,  quhairas  it  is  notourlie  knawine  to  all  wys  and  discreit  persones  that 
everie  brother  of   suche  ane  traid  and  calling   hes  alyk  right  to  all  ventour 
guidis  be  vertew  of  thair  burgeschip  and  fridome  with  the  broughe  quhair  they 
duell  quhilk  is  na  wayes  observit  amongest  the  britherine  of  the  calling  foirsaid, 
and  farder  the  saidis  complineris  caice  is  moir  to  be  pitied  for  that  rungis 
stappis  stingis  and  vtheris  of  that  kynd  ar  not  so  frequentlie  imbrought  to  this 
bru'  as  they  wount  to  be  of  old  quhairby  it  cumes  to  pas  that  many  of  the 
britherine  of  ye  sd  calling  being  poor  and  not  getting  thair  just  right  with  the 
rest  of  thair  britheiine  of  ye  richer  sort  ar  forcit  to  sit  ydle  quhairas  the  maist 
pairt  of  rich  of  the  calling  hes  aboundance  of  ventour  goodis  and  they  to  witt  ye 
poor  ar  forcit  to  by  from  thame  att  ane  verie  deir  rait,  crevand  thairfor  the  sd 
deacon  convenar  deacones  of  crauftis  and  thair  britherine  of  counsall  to  tak 
consideratioun  of  the  premiss  and  of  the  estait  of  the  complineris  and  vtheris 
the  poor  of  the  said  calling  and  how  they  ar  handlit  be  thair  deacone  and 
remanent  rich  britherine  of  thair  said  vocatioun  and  to  satle  ane  good  ordour 
amongest  thame  heirefter  so  that  the  poor  be  not  oppressit  and  borne  doun 
with  the  rich  bot  that  ilk  ane  of  tham  gett  thair  awin  right  according  to  reasone 
equitie  and  conschience  as  in  the  sd  clame  att  mair  lenthe  is  conteanit  quhilk 
being  red  and  considderit    be  the  said  decon  conveinar  deacones  of    craftis 
and  thair  sd  britherine  of  counsall  the  saidis  complineris  and  als  the  foirnamit 
James  Pollook  pnt  deacone  of  cowperis  and  sindrie  vtheris  the  speciall  men 
of  the  sd  calling  being  all  pnt  the  reasones  and  allegatiounes  bein  hard  and 
csidderit  of  baithe  the  saidis  pairteis  be  the  said  deacone  conveinar  deacones 


192  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1638 

and  thair  sd  bretherine  of  counsall  they  efter  matur  advyse  and  deliberatioun 
had  thairanent  be  this  thair  decreit  and  sentence  decernis  and  ordaines  that  in 
all  tyme  cuming  the  deacone  \v'  tvva  or  thrie  of  the  honest  men  of  the  calling  sail 
mak  bargane  and  by  all  goodis  of  the  qualitie  foirsd  inbrought  vpon  ventour 
for  the  vse  of  the  said  traide  and  vocatioun  and  the  samein  being  so  boucht 
ordaines  the  saidis  guidis  to  be  equallie  delt  and  dev^dit  to  the  poor  of  the 
sd  calling  als  weill  as  the  rich  alyk  without  respect  of  persones  and  the  expenss 
to  be  warit  vpon  the  bying  thairof  to  be  layit  on  the  haill  bargane,  as  also  the 
haill  bretherine  of  the  calling  als  weill  the  poor  as  the  rich  be  all  lawfully 
warnit  be  the  officer  of  the  craft  to  compeir  when  any  goodis  of  the  qualitie 
foirsaid  is  to  be  devydit  and  they  wha  cumes  not  in  dew  and  competent  tyme 
being  lawfully  warnit  as  said  is  sail  have  nae  pairt  of  that  bargane  and  if  ony 
poor  brother  of  the  calling  compeir  and  have  not  moey  in  reddines  to  pay  for 
his  lott  or  kavill  of  ony  bargane  to  be  boucht  heirefter  it  sail  be  leissum  to 
him  to  sell  his  pairt  thairof  to  ony  persone  quha  will  give  him  any  kynd  of 
proffeit  for  the  same  and  will  pay  the  deacon  of  the  calling  for  the  tyme  thair- 
for  conforme  as  the  bargane  is  to  be  payit. 

Anent  the  The  Said  day  foirsameikle  as  the  deacon  conveiner  deacones  and  thair 

Saboth  day.  j^^itherine  of  counsall  wnderstanding  the  Saboth  day  to  be  violat  and  brokine 
not  onlie  be  harbors  bot  be  divers  personis  of  thair  rank  in  polling  of  heidis 
on  the  said  day  quhairby  it  aft  tymes  fallis  out  that  thais  wha  vsis  the  samein 
bydis  from  the  kirk  and  drinkis  and  debuschis  in  houss  to  the  grait  offence 
dishonor  of  God  and  breking  of  his  commadmet  for  the  vvhilk  he  may  justlie 
power  his  wraith  and  indigna'un  vpon  the  citie  and  thairfor  it  is  statut  and 
ordanit  be  the  sd  deacon  conveiner  deaconis  of  craftis  and  thair  haill  bretherine 
of  counsal  that  nae  craftisman  within  this  bru'  of  q*  kynd  soever  aither  harbour 
or  vtheris  presome  nor  tak  vpon  hand  to  poll  any  heidis  on  the  Saboth  day 
heirefter  or  ony  vtherwayes  to  profane  the  samein  vnder  the  paine  of  tuenty 
schilings  for  ilk  fait  toties  quoties  and  the  deacon  conveinar  for  the  tyme  to 
cause  waird  thair  personis  be  warrand  of  the  provest  and  bailzeis  of  this  brughe 
during  his  will  and  pleasour. 

Muscattis.  The  said  day  ane  survay  and  compt  takine  q'  musquatts  was  in    the 

hospitall  efter  compt  thair  is  fund  to  be  in  the  hospitall  at  this  pnt  tyme  the 
number  of  threttie  fyve  musquattis  w'  stafis  and  bandelleirs  conforme. 

Duodecimo  Septembris  1638. 

Corsiat  and  The  said  day  Ritchart  Allane  pnt  deacon  conveiner  for  obedience  of  the 

muskattis.        ^^^  ^^^j^  anent   ingiving  of   armor  he  producit  and  gave  in  to  the  hospitall 

ane  corslatt  w'  held  peic  crag  peice  and  tasil.     Lykas  Robert  Findlay  d.  of  cor- 

doneris  johne  Buchanan  d.  of  baxteris  Thomas  Myllar  d.  of  hamcrmen  William 


1638I       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


193 


Reid  d.  of  wrights  Ro*  Fynnie  deacon  of  fleschor  Johne  Gilhagie  visito''  of 
maltmen  and  Johne  Woddrow  gairdner  gave  in  ilk  ane  of  thame  ane  musquatt 
with  staf  and  bandelleris  qlks  mak  vp  the  number  of  fourtie  twa  musquatts 
w'  stalf  and  bandelleris. 

Decimo  Octobris   1638. 

The  said  day  the  deacon  conveiner  deaconis  of  craftis  and  thair  britherine 
of  counsall  being  convenit  in  thair  hospitall  to  ellect  twa  personis  of  thair 
number  to  be  presentit  to  the  provest  and  bailzeis  and  counsall  of  the  samen 
with  the  sd  Ritchart  Allane  lait  deacon  conveinar  to  the  effect  that  ane  of 
thame  might  be  ellectit  deacon  conveiner  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  conforme  to  the 
ordour  efter  voitting  Walter  Dowglas  maltman  and  Robert  Hoggiszaird  tanner 
ar  ellectit  and  nominat  to  be  presentit  w'  the  sd  Ritchart  Allane  to  the  saidis 
provest  bailzeis  and  counsall  to  the  effect  foirsaid  and  ordaines  this  lyt  to  be 
presentit  be  Gavin  Nisbitt. 

And  Ritchart  Allane  being  continowit  deacon  cveinar  for  ane  zeir  to  cum 
he  maid  choyse  of  his  counsall  as  followis. 


William  Stalker 
Johnne  Wilsone 
Patrik  Adame 
William  Hunter 
Thomas  Scott 
Patrik  Clark 
George  Lyoun 


Mathow  Cauldwall 
William  Reid 
Walter  Neilsone 
Johne  Hall 
Robert  Cochrane 
Patrik  Brounsyde 
Johne  Woddrow 


William  Neilsone  bailzie 


Thomas  Myllar 
Johne  Kirkwood 

Niniane  Andersone 
Robert  Findlay 
Johnne  Andersone  elder 
Johnne  Andersone  zounger 
Johnne  Listoun 

Johnne  Muir 
Gavin  Nisbitt 
James  Ogilvie 
Robert  Horner 


James  Rankein 
Johne  Boyd 

Patrik  Colquhoun 
James  Colquhoun 
Michael  Baird 

Maister  James  Hamilton 

Walter  Dowglas 
Johnne  Gilhagie 
Niniane  Gilhagie 
William  Neilsone  elder 
Robert  Patersone 


194  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1638 

Manasses  Lyll  Robert  Fynnie 

James  Padie  Alexander  Colquhoun 

William  Govean 
Johnne  Buchanan 
James  Robesone  George  Muir 

Thomas  Andersone  William  Howie 

James  Pollook 

Johnne  Young  Thomas  Atchesone 

Dauid  Jack 

Vndecimo  Octobris  1638. 

The  said  day  the  deaconis  and  haUl  maist  pairt  of  the  personis  above- 
wryttine  being  pnt  gave  thair  aithes  as  vse  is  and  efter  voitting  did  ellect 
Johnne  Andersone  elder  cordoner  Gavin  Nisbitt  Niniane  Gilhagie  and  Johnne 
Andersone  zounger  cordoner  to  be  the  four  men  of  thair  number  to  sit  on  the 
deane  of  gildis  counsall  for  ane  zeir  to  cum. 

Decimo  quarto  Novembris  1638. 

The  quhilk  day  Robert  Findlay  collector  maid  his  compt  of  his  intro- 
missioun  with  the  hospitall  guidis  and  debtis  belonging  thairto  fra  Mertimes 
1637  to  Mertimes  last  conforme  to  his  intromissioun  as  followis. 

Item  in  the  first  receavit  be  him  fra  James  \\'otherspone  last  collecto''  that 

was  restand  awand  in  be  him  at  ye  making  of  his  last  compt  ii<=xliiii  I1 
Mair  receavit  be  him  fra  Dauid   Colquhoun  foi  ye  arent  of   fyve  hundrethe 

markis  fra  Mertimes  1636  to  Mertimes  1637    •  x.xvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  M''  Gavin  Hamilton  for  ye  rent  of  four  hundrethe  punds  ye  sd  zeir 

xxxij  ll 
Item  Ezekeill    Mountgomrie  for  ye  arent  of    four  hundrethe  markis  ye  zeir 

foirsd  ......    xxj  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  Charles  Pollook  for  ye  arent  of  twa  hundrethe  pundis  for  ye  terme 

of  Mertimes  1637  and  Witsonday  1638  .  .  .  xvj  ll 

Item  receavit  be  him  fra  Johne    Baird    in  Auchinloch    for    ye  arent  of  twa 

hundrethe  markis  fra  Mertimes  1636  to  Mertimes  1637  ^  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  receavit  fra  M''  Niniane  Campbell  for  ye  arent  of  ane  hundrethe  pundis 

the  said  zeir    .......  viij  li 

Item  fra  James  Boyd  of  (  )  for  ye  arent  of  four  hundrethe  punds 

receavit  be  him  for  twa  zeirs  preceiding  Mertimes  1637  •  Ixviij  li 
Item  receavit  fra  Sir  Thomas  Boyd  for  ye  arent  of  twa  hundrethe  pundis  fra 

Witsonday  1636  to  Mertimes  1637       ....  viij  ll 

Item  fra  James  Scheillis  zounger  couper  for  thrie  termis  arent  of  ane  hundrethe 

marks  viz  Witsonday  and  Mertimes  termes  1637  and  Witsonday  1638  viij  ll 


1638]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  195 

Item  fra  William  Ly'bodie  for  ye  arent  of  twa  hundrethe  markis  viz  Mertimes 

1637  ^nd  Witsonday  1638        .....  xvj  1i 

Item  fra  Robert  Boyd  of  Tovvrgill  for  ye  arent  of  ane  thousand  markis  viz 

Mertimes  1637  ^^'-^  Witsonday  1638    .  .  .     liij  1i  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  receavit    fra    M''    James   FuUartoun  for  ye  thrie  termis  arent  of   twa 

hundrethe  pundis  viz  preceiding  Mertimes  1637  .  .        xxiiij  ll 

Item  receavit    fra  Niniane   Andersone  zoungest  for  ane  termis  arent  of  fyve 

hundrethe  pundis  becaus  he  keipit  it  no  longer  .  .  xx  li 

Item  receavit  be  him  fra  ye  deaconis  of  quarter  comptis  w'  ye  litsteris  dew 

j'^lxij  li  xiij  s.  iii)  d. 
Item  receavit  be  him  fra  George  Muir  skipper  for  releife  of  ye  poor  liiij  s. 
Item  receavit  fra  M"'  James  Hamilton  for  ye  last  zeirs  quarter  comptis  for  ye 

chirurgians      .  .  .  .  .  .       iij  tl  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Mair  receavit  fra  Johne  Ramsay  in  name  of  vmqii  Mathow  Ker  for  ye  last 

zeirs  small  awallis        .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  ll 

Item  receavit  fra  James  Smythe  conforme  to  ane  act  of  ye  dait  ye  fyftein  of 

November  last  ....  xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Mair  receavit  be  him  fra  the  deacon  conveiner  for  ye  hospitallis  pairt  of  certaine 

ventour  tar     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  viij  li 

Mair  for   ye  arent  of  ane  hundrethe  punds  restit  in  his  awin  hand  as  a  pairt 

of  ye  moeys  he  receavit  fra  the  last  collector  .  .  viij  li 

Summa  of  ye  haill  charge 

aught  hundrethe  fourtein  pundis  aught  pennis. 

Followis  the  discharge. 

Item  ye  comptar  dischargis  himself  of  ye  sowmis  fallowing  debursit  be  him 
in  maner  efterspeit  viz  to  divers  poor  persones  conforme  to  ane  warrand 

.x.xii]  ll  x]  s. 
Mair  to  thame  conforme  to  ane  vther  warrand      .  .  xxxij  ll  vj  s. 

Mair  to  thame  conforme  to  ane  vther  warrand       .  .  .      xv  li  j  s. 

Mair  to  thame  conforme  to  ane  vther  warrand       .  .  xx  li  xvj  s. 

Mair  to  Dauid  Wilsone  Johne  Wyllie  Johne  Pollook  extraordinar  pensioneris 

xlli 
Mair  to  William  Howstoun  ane  extraordinar  pensioner      .  .  x  li 

Mair  to  the  ordinar  poor  men  in  the  sd  hospitall  .  .  .  j<^lxxxxii  ll 

Mair  givin  to  M''  Robert  Bigart  ane  poor  minister  .  .     ij  li  14  s. 

Mair  to  Robert  Somervell  supplicant  ....        .xxvij  s. 

Mair  to  ye  collector  of  ye  colledge  for  sustentatioun  of  thair  bursar 

Ixviij  li  xij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  to  ane  poor  travello''  .  .  .  .  .  xx  s. 

Mair  to  ane  poor  seikma    .  .  .  .  .  .  liiij  s. 

Item  to  Johnne  Wilsone  wiver       .....        xxvij  s. 


196 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1638 


Item  debursit  be  ye  comptar  for  cloathes  to  ye  poor  men  in  the  hospitall  in 
the  first  seaventein  elhs  and  ane  quarter  of  cloathe  att  yi]  s.  iiij  d.  the 
ell     inde  .......       xxviij  "li 

Mair  ten  ellis  att  tlirettie  se,\  s.  ye  ell    inde  .  .  .         xviij  ll 

Mair  nyne  ellis  att  33  s.  iiij  ye  ell    inde    .  .  .  .  xv  li 

Mair  threttein  ellis  of  cloathe  at  34  s.  ye  ell    inde  .  xxij  ll  xj  s. 

Mair  threttein  ellis  half  ell  blitchit  gim  hecklings  to  Ij-n  thair  cotts  and  britches 
att  vij  s.  ye  ell    inde  .  .  .  .  .       v  ti  xvj  s.  v]  d. 

Item  aughtein  ellis  att  seavin  schiling  ye  ell 

Mair  for  cloathe  to  be  scheitts  to  Johne  Smyth  and  Willia  Weir 

'M^  fyve  quarteris  hardin  for  clook  neckis  . 

Mair  for  making  of  twa  clooks  tw^  stand  of  clothes  with  hois 

Mair   for   bucrum   to   lyn   William   Calderwood  his  clook  neck 

Mair  for  mending  of  ye  chimnay  in  the  hospitall  and  for  ane  back 

Mair  for  dallis  to  be  ane  new  zett  to  ye  hospitall 

Mair  for  bell  naillis  y'to     . 

Mair  for  small  naillis  yi'to 

Mair  for  ane  iron  lott  stapill  and  naills  to  ye  zett 

Mair  for  ane  back  stapill  and  cleik  for  holding  vp  ye  zett  and  leid  y''to      xv  s. 

Mair  for  ane  kie  to  ye  box 

Item  for  making  of  ye  zett  ane  furme  and  ane  stool 

Mair  for  ane  glas  window  w'  ten  losuns  farder 

Mair  for  ane  pair  of  schone  to  W'"  Calderwood 

M""  to  him  for  twa  pair  of  schon     . 

Mair  givin  for  charging  of  Macolme  Crawfurd 

Mair  to  ye  dark  of  fie        . 

Item  Patrik  Watsone 

Item  foi  strae  to  the  poor  mens  bedis 

Mair  to  vmq"  Alex''  Cauldwallis  wyf 

Item  to  James  Graham  wiver 

Mair  for  tuelff  laid  of  coallis 

Mair  for  26  laid 

M'  for  a  ridell 

Item  for  peitts 

Item  for  dressing  ane  buckat 

Item  for  reding  and  dressing  of  ye  sink 

Mair  for  ane  draught  of  cley  y''to 

Mair  for  sum  cleikis  to  ye  musquatts 

Mair  for  laying  of  calsay    . 

Item  to  warkmen  to  serve  ye  calsie  layeris 

Item  to  Oliffer  Pittalloch  for  his  support 

Summa  of  ye  haill  discharg  is 

sex  hundrethe  twa  pund  aught  schilings  four  pennis 


vj  ll  vj  s. 

V  ll  xvj  s. 

vij  s.  vj  d. 

iiij  li 

iiij  s. 

iiij  ll  vj  s. 

.xlviij  s. 

xls. 

vs. 

xviij  s. 


VU]  s. 

xl  s. 

xxxvj  s. 

xxvj  s.  viij  d. 

Iiij  s.  iiij  d. 

-X.X  s. 

XX  li 

iij  li 

xxxvj  s. 

V  li  viij  s. 

iiij  li 

iiij  li  vj  s. 

viij  li  ix  s. 

vs. 

XXX  s. 

ij  s.  8d. 

3  li  19  s.  6d. 

xij  s. 

.    iiij  s.    6d. 

iij  li 

xxxij  s.  iiij  d. 

viij  li 


1639]       RECORDS  OK  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  197 

Sua  charge  and  discharge  being  calculat  the  compter  restis 
awand  in  twa  hundrethe  allevin  punds  xij  s.  iiij  d.  with  the  quhilk 
he  is  to  be  chargit  att  ye  making  of  his  nixt  compt  becaus  he  is  con- 
tinowit  collector  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  and  hes  acceptit  ye  sd  office 
and  hes  givin  his  aithe  as  vse  is. 

The  said  day  it  is  statut  and  ordanit  be  ye  deacon  conveiner  deacones 
and  thair  counsall  all  in  ane  voyce  that  the  collector  persew  Gavin  Nisbitt 
for  ye  fyve  hundrethe  pundis  adebtit  be  him  as  air  to  his  father  to  the  hospitall 
and  for  the  bygane  arents  thairof. 

The  said  day  thair  is  takin  out  of  ye  box  be  ye  deacon  cveiner  and  collector 
Macolme  Crawfurds  band  M''  Thomas  Stewartis  band  and  William  Sempills 
band. 

Nota  ye  last  zeirs  burges  silver  is  not  comptit  in  the  former  compt  extending  Memorandum. 
to  xiiij  1l  xviij  s. 

The  said  day  the  dark  is  continowit. 

19  November  1638. 

Nota  ye  collector  receavit  fourtie  markis  fra  Thomas  Inglisch  tanner  for  iMcmoranduw. 
his  gild  brother  fyne  and  is  to  be  chargit  thairwith  att  his  nixt  compt. 

Decimo  Tertio  Februarij  1639. 

The  said  day  the  deacon  conveiner  deacones  of  craftis  and  thair  counsall  Reid  coUectcr. 
hes  ellectit  and  be  ye  tennor  of  this  pnt  act  ellectis  ^^'illiam  Reid  ane  of  ye 
ordinar  officeris  of  this  burghe  collector  to  thair  small  anwalls  ad  culpam  and 
ordaines  him  to  have  ye  ordinar  fiall  thairfor  quha  being  pnt  acceptit  the  said 
charge  and  gave  his  aithe  de  fideli  administratione  y''intill. 

The  said  day  thair  is  put  in  the  box  the  bandis  following  viz  Robert 
Sempills  band  with  ane  new  band  grantit  be  Macolme  Crawfurd  and  his  cauris 
as  also  ane  band  grantit  be  Laird  of  Elderslie  for  fyve  hundrethe  marks  and 
ane  band  grantit  be  James  Blair  of  Adamtoun  for  twa  hundrethe  markis. 

Nota  ye  collector  hes  ye  last  twa  bandis  to  be  allowit  to  him  in  his  dis- 
charge att  ye  making  of  his  nixt  compt. 

The  said  day  Johne  Wyllie  cowper  is  admittit  ane  of  ye  ordinar  poor  men 
in  the  hospitall  in  ye  place  of  vmq"  Johne  Smythe  and  ordaines  him  to  be 
sustenit  thairin  be  thair  collector  conforme  as  ye  rest  of  ye  poor  men  in  the 
hous  ar. 


igS 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1639 


VVyllie 
Wilsone. 


Xota. 


The  said  day  ye  deacon  conveinar  deaconis  and  britherine  of  thair  counsall 
wnderstanding  that  they  have  payit  this  lang  tyme  bygaine  to  ye  said  Johne 
Wyllie  and  to  Dauid  Wilsone  couperis  ilk  ane  of  them  twenty  markis  be  zeir 
and  now  in  regaird  that  they  have  placit  the  said  Johne  Wyllie  in  thair  hos- 
pital! and  yat  ye  cowperis  hes  nae  mae  poor  to  sustein  bot  ye  sd  Dauid  Wilsoun 
thairfoir  they  have  concludit  statut  and  ordanit  to  withhauld  ye  said  pensioun 
fra  ye  said  Dauid  Wilsoun  heirefter  and  hes  distribut  ye  sd  twa  pensiounes 
as  fallowis  viz  to  Johne  Liddell  tailzo""  and  Gawane  Lies  meillman  and  ordaines 
y""  collector  to  pay  to  ilk  ane  of  them  fyve  markis  quarterlie  and  to  begin 
pntlie  and  hes  ordanit  the  deacon  of  couperis  to  sie  ye  said  Dauid  WOsoun 
honestlie  sustenit  qlk  he  faithfully  promeist  to  doe. 

To  remember  to  charge  ye  collector  att  ye  making  of  his  compt  w'  thrie 
scoir  pundis  he  vpliftit  fra  Adame  and  Androw  Todis  for  thair  gildrie. 


Preateis 
Landes. 


Vigesimo  tertio  Fehruarij  1639. 

The  quhilk  day  James  Patersone  sone  lavvfull  to  James  Patersone  burges 
of  this  bru'  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Gabriell  Cochrane  skinner  to  serve 
him  as  prenteis  and  servand  during  ye  space  of  seavin  zeirs  conforme  to  ye 
indentor  betuixt  them  thairvpon  of  ye  dait  ye  sevint  day  of  Februarij 
instant. 

xxvj  Fe"'  1639. 

The  qlk  day  Robert  Landes  sone  law"  to  Dauid  Landes  maltman  in 
Paislay  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Gabriell  Heriot  baxter  to  serve  him  as 
prenteis  for  sevin  zeiris  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indento'' 
of  ye  dait  ye  xxv  of  this  instant. 


Tent. 


Powder. 


Decimo  Septimo  Aprilis  1639. 

The  said  day  the  deacon  conveinei  deacones  and  thair  haill  britherine 
of  counsall  hes  ordanit  thair  collector  to  cause  mak  ane  tent  for  thair  comoun 
vse  upon  the  comoun  charges  and  ordaines  ilk  deacon  to  pay  in  thair  pairt 
thairof  conforme  as  they  pay  thair  dewis  to  the  hospitall. 

The  said  daj^  ordaines  the  collector  to  imploy  James  Padie  or  Manasses 
Lyll  to  by  to  thair  vse  four  hundrethe  weght  of  powder  for  the  comoun  vse 
and  ordaines  everi  deacon  to  pay  his  awin  pairt  thairof. 


Prenteis 
.-Vikine. 


Decimo  Octavo  Junij  1639. 

The  said  day  Johne  Aiken  sone  lawfull  to  James  Aiken  mj-ller  att  Provand 
Mylne  is  buikit  heirin  prentice  \v'  Androw  Pettigrew  cowper  to  serve  him 
conforme  to  the  indentoi  of  ye  dait  ye  seavintein  day  of  Junij  instant. 


1639]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  Uj<) 

Decimo  Sexlo  Octoberis  1639. 
The  qiihilk  day  Richart    Allane  lait  deacon  convciner  and  new  ellectit  Dekine 
bailzie  with  the  deacones  of  craftis  of  ye  said  brughe  and  thair  britherine  of  ^°'^'^^°^' 
counsall  being  convenit  for  effecting  thrie  persones  of  y^  number  to  be  presentit 
to  the  provest  bailzies  and  counsafi  thairof  to  the  effect  that  ane  of  them  might 
be  eftectit  deacon  conveiner  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  cfter  lytting  be  pluralitie  of 
voittis   Jolme   Andersone   elder    tanner  William    Howie   litster   and  Niniane 
Gilhagie  maltman  to  be  presentit  to  the  saids  provest  bailzies  and  counsall 
to  the  effect  forsaid  and  the  saids  lyttis  to  be  presentit  to  Johne  Kirkwood 
deacon  of  hamermen. 

The  said  day  it  is  statut  and  ordanit  that  the  ten  punds  of  vnlaw  that  vvnlaw. 
was  vpliftit  fra  Robert  Somervell  be  givin  to  the  cowperis  to  help  to  defray 
thair  chargis  and  expenss  in  finding  labarrowis  att  ye  said  Roberts  instance 
being  chargit  be  him  vpon  Ires  of  labarrowis. 

The  said  day  Walter  Neilsoun  wisitor  of  maltmen  Patrik  Adame  lait  Muskats. 
deacone  of  ye  tailzo's  William  Hunter  lait  deacon  of  skinneris  George  Lyoun 
lait  deacon  of  cowperis  Mathow  Cawldwall  lait  deacone  of  maissones  Robeit 
Cochrane  lait  deacone  of  flescho^s  and  Patrik  Brounsyde  lait  deacone  of  ye 
bonnetmakers  being  all  new  deacones  this  last  zeir  gave  in  thair  muskattis 
stalffis  and  bandeleirs  conforme  to  the  ordor  and  actis  maid  thairanent  of 
befor  quhilk  with  fourtie  twa  muscattis  was  in  the  hous  befor  makis  vp  fourtie 
nyne  muscatts  with  the  pertinents. 

Decimo  Septimo  Odohris  1639. 
The  said  day  the  forsaid  Niniane  Gilhagie  maltman  being  yesterday 
newlie  ellectit  deacon  conveiner  and  having  nae  tyme  to  ellect  his  new  counsall 
he  lyttit  his  haill  old  counsall  and  new  deacones  and  be  pluralitie  of  voittis 
William  Neilson  lait  bailzie  Jo"  Andersone  elder  tanner  Gawane  Nisbitt  and 
Thomas  Scott  baxter  ar  ellectit  the  four  men  to  sitt  on  the  deane  of  gildis 
counsall  for  ye  craftis  of  this  burghe  for  ane  zeir  to  cum. 

Vigesimo  tertio  Odobris  1639. 
The  said  day  the  said  Niniane  Gilhagie  new  deacon  conveiner  ellectit 
thir  persones  following  to  be  on  his  counsall  for  ane  zeir  to  cum. 

The  names  of  the  deacones 

Johne  Kirkwood  Johne  Stewart  elder 

Johne  Listoun  Johne  Baird 

Peiter  Johnestoun  Walter  Neilsoun 

James  Padie  Johne  Hall 

James  Robesone  Alexander  Holmes 


^00 


RECORDS   OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 

Thomas  Andersone 
George  Lochheid 

Ritchart  Allane  baillie 

M''  James  Hamiltoun 


[1639 


William  Goveane 
Robert  Hutchesoun 


William  Neilsoun 
Walter  Douglas 
William  Neilsone  elder 
Johne  Gilhagie 
William  Ly'body 
Robert  Patersone 

Robert  Cochrane 
George  Brume  zounger 

Patrik  Brownsyde 
George  Muir 

William  Howie 
Jo"  M<=Ewin 
Thomas  Atchesone 


William  Stalker 
Jo°  M<=Ben 

Johne  Andersone  elder 
Johne  Wilsoun 
William  Coatts 
Johne  Andersoun  zounger 
Robert  Findlay 

Gawane  Nisbitt 
Patrik  Adame 
Robert  Horner 
Robert  Boyd 

Manasses  Lyll 
Wilham  Hunter 

Thomas  Scott 
Johne  Buchanan 

Patrik  Clark 

George  Lyoun 
Robert  Snype 

Mathow  Cauldwall 
Johne  Boyd 

William  Reid 
Patrik  Colquhoun 

The  said  day  William  Zair  notar  is  continowit  dark  for  ane  zeir  to  cum 
who  hes  givin  his  aithe  as  vse  is. 

The  said  day  William  Hunter  skinner  be  pluralitie  of  vottis  is  ellectit 
collector  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  quha  being  present  acceptit  the  said  office  in  and 
vpon  him  and  gave  his  aithe  as  vs  is. 

Prima  Novembris  1639. 
The  qlk  day  Robert  Findlay  last  collecto''  maid  ane  compt  of  his  intro- 
missioun  with  the  hospitall  guidis  the  zeir  preceiding  quhairof  charge  and 
discharge  fallowes. 


1639]      RECORDS   OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.         201 

Charge. 

In  the  first  fra  Macolme  Crawfurd  for  the  anuall  of  fyve  hundrethe  marks 

fra  Witsonday  1637  to  Mertimes  1638  .  .  .  xl  ll 

Item  fra  James  Boyd  of  arent  fra  Mertimes  1637  to  Mertimes  1638      xxxij  tl 
Item  fra  Sir  Thomas  Boyd  of  arent    fra   Mertimes  1637  to  Mertimes  1638 

xvj  ll 
Item  fra  Maister  Gawane  Hamiltoun  for  arent  at  Mertimes  1638  xvj  ll 

Item  fra  Ezekeill  Montgomrie  for  arent  att  Witsonday  last  being  thrie  termes 

xxxij  ll 
Item  fra  Charles  Pollook  for  anual  rent  fra  Witsonday  1638  to  Witsonday 

last     ........  xvj  ll 

Item  fra  Johne  Baird  the  principall  sowme  of  tua  hundrethe  merkis  with  ane 

zeirs  anwal  rent  extending  to  ....      j^xliiij  ll 

Item  fra  Maister  Niniane  Campbell  of  arent  fra  Witsonday  1638  to  Witsonday 

last     ........  viij  ll 

Item  fra  James  Scheills  zounger  of  arent  the  said  zeir        .      v  ll  vj  s.   viij  d. 
Item  fra  William    Ly'body  of  arent   fra  Witsonday  1638   to  Witsonday  last 

xvj  ll 
Ite  fra  Dauid  Colquhoun  fra  Mertimes  1637  to  Mertimes  1638 

xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  fra  Robert  Boyd  of  Tourgill  of  arent  fra  Witsonday  1638  to  Mertimes 

y^'efter  .....  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  Robert  Semple  of  Nobilstoun  twa  zeirs  arent  viz  fra  Mertimes  1636 

to  Mertimes  1638         ....  xxj  tl  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra   Johne  Andersone  zounger  for  the  arent  of   fyve  hundrethe  markis 

fra  Witsonday  1638  to  Witsonday  last  .  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  William  Nobill  of  Nobilsferme  thrie  termis  arent  of  fyve  hundrethe 

marks  viz  fra  Witsonday  1632  to  Mertimes  1638  .  xl  li 

Item  fra  Johne  Burnes  for   Maister  Thomas  Stewart  of  arent  iiij  li 

Item  restand  in  the  comjitaris  hand  att  the  making  of  his  last  compt 

ijf^xj  li  xij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  receavit  fra  Patrik  Colquhoun  wha  was  collector  in  the  deane  of  gilds 

counsall  in  anno  1638  ....  xiiij  h  xviij  s. 

Item  receavit  of  quarter  comptis    .  .  .  jeliij  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  Thomas  Inglish  for  his  gild  brother  fyne        xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  fra  Adame  and  Andrew  Todis  for  thair  gild  brother  fynis  Ix  ll 

Item  for  the  bairnes  mortclaithe    .....        xxiiij  s. 
Item  fra  the  exeoi's  of  vmq"  William  Flemyng  commissier  dark  of  legacie 

xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  fra  the  exeo''s  of  vmqi'  Johne  Merschell  merchand  of  legacie  .xl  li 
Item  fra  the  ex  col's  of  vmq"  Adam  Ritchie  merchand  of  legacie  vj  li  .xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  fra  the  Utsteris  .  .  .  .  .     vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 


202         RECORDS  OF   THE   TRADES   HOUSE  OF   GLASGOW.      L1639 

Item  of  burgess  silver  this  last  zeir  .  .  xxxij  1i  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  Gawane  Nisbitt   in  compleitt    payment  of  all    bygine  arents  of  ye 

fyve  hundrethe  pundis  awand  be  him  to  the  hospitall  .         Ix  ll 

Summa  of  the  charge  is         .  .  .  i^Jj<=lvii  ll  j  s. 

Discharge. 

Item  lent  out  to  James  Wallace  of  Allerslie  att  Mertimes  last  vpon  his  band 

iijcxxxiij  ll  vj  s.  \nij  d. 
Item  lent  out  to  James  Blair  of  Adamtoun  att  ye  said  terme  vpon  liis  band 

jt^xxxiij  li  vj  s.   viij  d. 
Item  to  the  ordinar  poor  men  of  ye  hospitall  .  .  i<^lxxxxij  ll 

Item  to  the  four  ordinar  pensioners  .  .  Iiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  sindrie  poor  persones  vpon  supplicatiounes  att  Hallowmes  cowrt 

x-iij  ll  j  s. 
Mair  to  poor  persones  att  Candilmes  cowrt  .  .         xxxvj  ll  xiij  s. 

Mair  to  poor  persones  vpon  supplicatiounes  att  Beltane  cowrt         7  li  xj  s. 
Item   to   the  poor   vpon   supplicatiounes   att   Lambes  cowrt         xvj  ll  viij  s. 
Item  to  George  Schirilaw  ......  liiij  s. 

Mair  to  Johne  Liggett        ......  liiij  s. 

Item  to  Robert  Hamiltoun  .....        xx\-ij  s. 

Item  for  cloathe  to  be  claithes  and  hois  to  Johne  Geddes  and  Johne  Gairdner 

sex  ells  thrie  quarteris  att  36  s.  the  ell  is         .  .  xiij  ll  xix  s. 

Item  for  lynings  thairto     ......  xlix  s. 

Item  for  ane  pair  of  scheittis  to  Johne  Geddes       .  .  Ivj  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  ane  covering  to  him         .  .  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Item  for  aught  ellis  hardin  to  be  scheitts  to  Andrew  Gray         Ivj  s.  iiij  d. 
Mair  for  ane  covering  to  him  .  .  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Item  for  ane  winding  scheit  to  Johne  Smythe        .  j  ll  ij  s.  vj  d. 

Item  spent  att  his  walk     .  .  .  .  .  .  .x  s. 

Item  for  cloathe  to  be  hois  to  Robert  Fischer  and  Androw  Gray  xlv  s. 

Item   for   cloathe  to   be   ane   goup   to   Johne   Liggett  iiij  ll  \-ij  s.  vj  d. 

Item  for  fourty  laidis  of  coalles  att  seavin  schilings  sex  pennis  ye  laid  is    xv  ll 
Mair  for  thrie  thrive  of  strae  .  .  .  .  .  xl  s. 

Item  to  Thomas  Myller  for  dressing  of  ye  musquattis  in  anno  1638         x  ll 
Item  spent  in  the  hospitall  with  Doctor  William  Guill  in  Aberdeen 

xiiij  li  ix  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  to  the  coUedge  collector  for  half  zeirs  buirding  of  thair  burso""  in  the 

colledge  .....  xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Mair  for  poynting  of  the  hospitall  .  .  .  .    v  ll  iiij  s. 

Item  to  Johne  Dingwall  for  bandileirs        ....  xiij  s. 

Item  to  James  Padie  for  out  red  of  ye  compt  of  ye  powder  .  xvj  ll 

Mair  for  lunt  .  .  .  .  .  .        v  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 


Vll]  s. 

{  ye  lock 

ixs. 

. 

xxxii)  s. 

. 

xls. 

. 

ixs. 

. 

xxiiij  s. 

XX  t 

liij 

s.  iiij  d. 

XXX  s. 

. 

viij  s. 

xxix  s.  iiij  d. 

, 

vs. 

1639]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.         203 

Item  to  Thomas  Crawfurd  for  WTytting 

Item  for  ane  barrell  to  keip  the  powder  and  mending  of  ye  lock 
Item  for  iron  wark  and  naillis  to  hing  the  nmsquatts 
Item  for  careing  of  ye  tent  east     . 
M''  for  drying  and  stenting  of  it  when  it  cam  hom 
Item  for  cleikis  and  cordis  y''to 
Item  to  the  dark  for  his  fie  .  .  . 

Item  to  the  officer  for  twa  pair  schon 
Item  to  Dauid  Wilsoun  att  ye  dimissioun  of  his  pensioun 
Item  for  a  harll      ..... 
Item  for  nyne  laid  peittis  ... 

Item  for  a  buckatt  .... 

Item  to  William  Reid  wright  for  lyning  of  the  bowell  att  the  bord  heid  ane 
lock  thairto  dressing  of  ye  stair  and  for  tymber  yi^to         ix  ll  xv  s.  ij  d. 

Summa  of  the  discharge  is 

nyne  hundrethe  thrie  scoir  seavintein  pundis  sex  schilings 
twa  pennis. 

Swa  charge  and  discharge  being  calculat  the  comptar  restis 
awand  in  ane  hundrethe  thrie  scoir  nyntein  pundis  fourtein  schilings 
ten  pennis  qlk  he  is  ordanit  to  pay  W°^  Hunter  collecto"". 

The  said  day  it  is  ordanit  to  be  remembrit  that  the  small  dewties  con- 
teanit  in  the  rentall  ar  not  comptit  in  the  compt  befor  wryttine  bot  ye  collector 
is  to  be  chargit  thairwith  att  his  nixt  compt  making. 

The  said  day  M''  Gawane  Hamiltounes  band  whairin  Lachop  is  cautioner  Bands  takia 


out. 


is  takine  out  be  the  deacon  conveiner  to  be  gottine  renewit  or  then  put  to 
executioun  and  William  Zair  hes  Gawane  Nisbitts  regrat  band  of  fyve  hundrethe 
punds  and  is  to  report  ane  new  subscryvit  band  y''for. 

The  said  day  ordaines  the  collector  to  pay  to  Robert  Findlay  last  collector  Warrand. 
twenty  marks  for  his  extraordinar  paines  this  twa  zeirs  and  to  pay  to  Johne 
M<=Ben  ten  markis  for  thir  causis  viz  for  dressing  the  muskatis  mending  sum 
of  ye  stalfs  and  wy  wark  yi'anent. 

The  said  day  the  officer  is  continowit. 

Nota  the  deacon  conveiner  hes  the  key  of  ye  almerie  and  the  deacones  of  Kie  keiperis. 
hamermen  tailzo's  and  visitor  of  nialtmen  the  keyis  of  the  coffer. 

Quinto  Decembris  1639. 

The  whilk  day  Alex""  Sword  sone  law''  to  vmq'^  Jo°  Sword  in  Auchin-    Sword 
rivoche  is  buikit  heirin  as  prenteis  w'  Alex""  Sword  cordoner  burges  of  this  P"^®"'^'^' 


204  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW        [1639 

bru'  to  serve  him  as  prenteis  during  the  space  of  sevin  zeiris  and  twa  zeiris 
for  meit  and  drink  conforme  to  ye  indentof  of  ye  dait  the  aught  day  of  Sept- 
ember iajvjc  threttie  aught  zeiris. 


Duodecimo  Febriiarij  1640. 

B3n(i  The  said  day  WilUam  Zair  producit  ane  new  band  subscryvit  be  Gawane 

producit.  Nisbitt  of  fyve  hundrethe  punds  money  that  was  awand  be  his  wmq"  father 

and  Gawane  Nisbitt  maltman  to  the  poor  of  the  hospitall  conforme  to  ane 

prior  band. 

Money  put  in  The  Said  day  the  thrie  hundrethe  marks  as  a  pairt  of  the  sex  hundrethe 

the  box.  marks  that  was  awand  be  M''  Gawane  Hamilton  and  the  four  hundrethe  marks 

that  was  adebtit  be  Ezekiell  Mountgomrie  and  fyftie  marks  that  was  receavit 
fra  the  exeo^s  of  wmq'i  Barbra  Stewart  ar  all  put  in  the  box. 


Small 
anawallis. 


The  said  day  William  Reid  officer  maid  compt  of  the  small  anwallis 
quhairof  the  haill  extendis  to  fyftie  fyve  punds  seavintein  schilings  and  he 
hes  producit  fourtie  fyve  punds  four  pennis  and  it  is  to  be  remembrit  that 
the  four  punds  ten  schilings  four  pennis  awand  be  Gilbert  Merschell  and  M"" 
Johne  Herbertsone  and  the  twenty  nyne  schilings  awand  be  Androw  Haddowis 
ar  not  comptit  and  William  Reid  hes  gottine  for  his  paines  this  last  zeir  fyve 
punds  four  pennis  and  ye  fourtie  punds  is  put  in  the  box. 


Sexto  Maij  1640. 

Legacie  Ingiis.  The  Said  day  the  deacon  conveiner  producit  ye  sowme  of  ane  hundrethe 

markis  money  quhilk  was  receavit  be  hini  fra  Patrik  Bell  as  ane  legacie  left 
be  wmq"  James  Inglis  lait  provest  of  this  brughe  to  ye  pwir  of  ye  hospitall 
and  is  put  in  the  box. 

Leis  piacit  in  The  said  day  Gawane  Lies  maltman  is  admittit  and  receavit  as  ane  of 

ye  hospital).      ^^  ordinar  poor  within  the  hospitall  thairin  to  be  in  neid  conforme  to    the 
comoun  ordo^. 

Memorandum.  Memorandum  William  Reid  officer  hes  the  decreit  evictit  against  Gilbert 

Merschell  and  M'  Johne  Herbertsone. 


Money  in  ye 
box. 


Band. 


xiiij  August  1640. 

The  said  day  the  thrie  hundrethe  markis  that  v\as  awand  be  Willia  and 
Walter  Ly^bodies  was  put  in  the  box. 

The  same  day  Robert  Semple  of  Noblestoun  his  band  was  takine  out 
and  givin  to  the  deacon  conveiner  aither  to  caus  him  pay  the  arent  or  to  put 
the  band  to  executioun. 


i640l       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE   OF  GLASGOW.         205 

The  said  day  thair  was  ane  muskatt  producit  for  Peiter  Johnstoun  quhilk  Muskat. 
is  put  with  the  rest. 

The  said  day  be  pluralitie  of  voittis  it  is  concludit  that  the  haill  byrunes 
awand  be  Gilbert  Merschell  be  the  decreit  evictit  aganst  him  is  referrit  to 
his  awin  will  and  discretioun. 

xxiiij  September  1640. 

The  said  day  James  Bowie  lawfull  sone  to  Walter  Bowie  in  Balmoir  is  Bowie 
buikit  heirin  prentice  with  John  Ritchie  maissoun  to  serve  him  as  prentice  ^^^"  "^' 
during  the  space  of  seavin  zeirs  and  twa  zeirs  for  meitt  and  fie  conforme  to 
the  indentor  of  the  dait  ye  twenty  four  day  of  Februaiij  jajvjc  threttie  fyve 
zeirs. 

Decimo  quarto  Octobrts  1640. 

The  said  day  Niniane  Gilhagie  deacon  conveiner  with  the  deacons  of  Deacon 
craftis  and  thair  counsall  for  electing  of  twa  of  y''  number  to  be  presentit  with 
the  deacon  conveiner  to  the  effect  that  ane  of  them  might  be  choysine 
deacon  conveiner  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  efter  voycing  Johne  Andersoun  elder 
and  William  Howie  war  electit  to  ye  effect  foirsaid  and  this  act  to  be  presentit 
be  Gawin  Neisbit. 

And  the  said  Niniane  Gilhagie  being  continwit  dekin  convenar  for  ane 
zeir  to  cum  did  meit  on  ye  16  day  of  yis  instant  with  the  dekins  new  and  old 
and  ye  old  csell  and  efter  voycing  they  did  elect  Richard  Allane  Johne  Andersone 
elder  Johne  Andersone  zounger  tanneris  and  Walter  Neilsone  maltman  to  be 
ye  four  men  to  ve  craftis  to  sit  with  ye  deane  of  gild  for  ane  zeir  to  cum. 

x.xj  Oc"^  1640. 

The  said  day  Alex^  Holmes  lait  dekine  of  ye  fleschors  gave  in  and  producit  Muscatt 
his  muscatt  he  sould  have  producit  of  befoir  and  yen  the  persones  following  P™  ""*' 
war  sworne  as  counsallo^s  to  ye  dekine  convenar  for  ane  zeir  to  cum. 

Johne  Kirkwood  Johne  Stewart  elder 

Johne  Wilsoun  Patrik  Colquhoun 

Robert  Horner  Robert  Patersoun 

Manasses  Lyll  Daniell  Broun   x 

Thomas  Scott  George  Brwme  zounger 

Ritchart  Flaikfeild  Johne  M^Lauchlane 

Andro  Snype  Robert  Hutchesoun 

William  Neilsoun  baillie 

Arthor  Tackattis  George  Lochheid 

Johne  Scott  George  Lyoun 


2o6         RECORDS   OF   THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF   GLASGOW.       [1640 


Wilsone 
collecto'. 


Adame  Nicoll 

Ritchart  Allane 
Johne  Andersoun  elder 
Johne  Listoun 
William  Coattis 
Robert  Hoggiszaird 
Johne  Andersoun  zounger 

Gawane  Nisbitt 
Peiter  Johnstoun 
James  OgOvie 
Patrik  Adame 
Robert  Boyd 

James  Padie 
William  Hunter 

James  Robesoun 
Johne  Buchanan 

Thomas  Andersoun 


Johne  Boyd 
Robert  Cauldwall 

James  Colquhoun 
Johne  Baird 

Johne  Hall 

WUliam  Neilsoun  elder 
Walter  Dowglas 
Walter  Neilsoun 
Johne  Gilhagie 
William  Ly'bodie 
William  Wilsoun 

Alexander  Holmes 

William  Govean 
George  Muir 

William  Howie 
Thomas  Atchesoun 


The  said  day  the  dark  and  officer  is  continowit  wha  gave  y''  aithe  as  vse. 

The  said  day  William  Wilsoun  maltman  is  ellectit  collector  be  pluralitie 
of  voittis  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  quha  being  pnt  acceptit  the  said  office  in  and 
vpon  and  gave  his  aithe  as  vse  is. 

Quarto  Novembris  1640. 

The  said  day  William  Hunter  last  collector  maid  compt  of  his  intro- 
missioun  with  the  hospitalls  guidis  this  last  zeir  quhairof  charge  and  discharge 
fallowes. 

Charge. 

In  the  first  he  chargis  himself  with  that  quhilk  he  receavit  from  Robert 
Findley  wha  was  collector  befor  him  and  was  restand  be  him  at  the  making 
of  his  compt    .....  j^^lxxi.x  l3  xiiij  s.  x  d. 

Item  receavit  be  him  fra  James  Blair  of  Adamtoun  for  ye  arent  of  twa  hundrethe 
merkis  ye  termes  of  Witsonday  and  Mertimes  1639         -"^  ^  ^i'J  S-  "ij  ^■ 

Item  for  Dauid  Colquhoun  for  ye  anwall  of  fyve  hundrethe  markis  the  said 
zeir     ......  -xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  Ezekiell  Montgomrie  for  ye  anwall  of  four  hundrethe  markis 
the  Mertimes  terme  1639  ^t  quhilk  tyme  the  sd  principall  sowme  was 
payit  ......  x  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 


1640]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  207 

Item  rcceavit  from  the  Laird  of  Nobilsferme  for  the  anuall  of  fyve  hundrethe 
markis  ye  termes  of  Witsonday  and  Mertimes  1639      ^^^i  ^  ^iij  ^-  ^"3  '^■ 

Item  fra  James  Boyd  for  ye  anwall  of  four  hundrethe  punds  the  saidis  termes 

xxxij  li 

Item  fra  James  Scheilhs  for  ye  anwall  of  j^  markis  the  termes  of  Mertimes 
1639  ^"<i  Witsonday  last         .  .  .  .       v  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  M''  Gawane  Hamiltoun  for  ye  anwall  of  four  hundrethe  punds  ye 
tmes  of  Witsonday  and  Mertimes  1639  t^^*^  thairof  was  payit  the  Wit- 
sonday {me  last  .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  ll 

Item  fra  Macolme  Crawfurd  for  ye  anwall  of  fyve  hundrethe  markis  the  tmes 
of  Witsonday  and  Mertimes  1639         •  •  ^^^'1  ^  ^"J  S-  "'J  d. 

Item  fra  Johne  Andersoun  for  ye  anwall  of  vther  fyve  hundrethe  markis  the 
said  tme  of  Mertimes  and  Witsonday  last        .  xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  Maister  James  Foulartoun  for  the  anwall  of  fyve  hundrethe  markis 
ye   terme   of   Mertimes   1638   Witsonday   and   Mertimes   1639  xl  li 

Item  fra  ye  Laird  of  Allerslie  for  ye  anwall  of  fyve  hundrethe  markis  ye  tmes 
of  Witsonday  and  Mertimes  1639  and  Witsonday  last  .  xl  ll 

Item  fra  M''  Ninian  Campbell  for  ye  anwall  of  ane  hundrethe  punds  ye  termes 
of  Mertimes  and  Witsonday  last  ....  viij  ll 

Item  fra  the  Laird  of  Nobilstoun  for  ye  anwall  of  twa  hundrethe  markis  ye 
tmes  of  Witsonday  and  Mertimes  1639  ^^'^  Witsonday  last     .  xvj  t 

Item  fra  Robert  Boyd  of  Tourgill  for  the  anwall  of  ane  thowsand  markis  ye 
Witsonday  and  Mertimes  tmes  1639    .  .  Iiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  William  Ly'bodie  for  ye  anwall  of  twa  hundrethe  punds  for  ye  Wit- 
sonday and  Mertimes  tmes  last  at  ye  whilk  tyme  the  prin"  sowme  was 
payit  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  xvj  ll 


j'^lij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

xiij  li  vj  s.  viiij  d. 

vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 


Item  fra  ye  deacones  of  quarter  comptis    . 

M''  from  the  gardners 

Item  from  them  all  for  ye  officiers  fie 

Item  from  the  litsters 

Item  from  ye  exeo^s  of  wmqll  George  Johnsone  of  legacie  .  x  tl 

Item  from  the  exeo's  of  wmqll  George  Barclay  of  legacie     xvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  from  ye  exeo''s  of  wmqll  James  Myller  .  .  .  xx  ll 

Item  gottine  in  ye  kist  of  wmqll  Johne  Gardiner  at  his  deceis  xliiij  s. 

Summa  of  ye  haill  charge  is  .  vij^lxxxiij  i  v  s.  vj  d 


Discharge. 

In  the  first  debursit  to  Johne  M^Ben  for  dressing  ye  muskatts 

vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  to  ye  puir  in  ye  almoushous  of  yair  haill  zeirs  dewtie  jt^lxxxviij  li 
Item  for  ane  wallat  to  put  powder  in         ...  .  x  s. 


2o8  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1640 

Item  to  certaine  poor  persones  at  Hallowmes  cowTt  .  xxj  li  x  s.  4d. 

Item  Gawane  Lies  for  twa  quarters  pentioun  .  vj  ti  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  Johne  Pollook  Johne  Liddell  and  William  Howstoun  for  thair  haill 

zeirs  pentiounes  .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  ll 

Item  to  Robert  Findlay  last  collector  for  his  paines  conforme  to  ye  warrand 

xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  to  W'illiam  Calderwood  for  shoes        .  .  .  Iiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  Johne  Merschell  for  Johne  Napper  conforme  to  his  discharge  x  li 

Item  to  James  Flemyng  debursit  be  him  in  Edinbru*       .  .  vj  s. 

Item  to  the  colledge  collector  for  ye  last  thrie  termes  of  y^  bursar  in  the  colledge 

Item  debursit  for  cloathe  to  be  cloathes  sheitts  and  vthers  necessaris  to  ye 
poor  in  the  hospitall    .....(  ) 

Item  for  ane  kist  and  wining  sheit  to  Johne  Gardner         .  iij  ll  viij  s. 

Mair  to  Androw  Lyll  for  making  of  cloathes  .  .  .         xliiij  s. 

Item  to  certaine  poor  persones  at  Candilmes  covvrt  conforme  to  ye  warrand 
red  and  allowit  .....  xxxiiij  ll  4d. 

Item  to  the  officer  for  his  fie  .  .  .  xuj  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  ye  dark  for  his  tie  .  .  .  .  .  xx  ll 

Item  spent  be  ye  deacon  convener  and  vthers  wha  was  with  him  at  ye  pay- 
ment y^of        .......  liiij  s. 

Item  to  Thomas  Crawfurd  for  wrytting  of  certaine  bandis  .  xij  s. 

Item  to  certaine  poor  persones  at  Beltane  cov\Tt  conforme  to  ye  warrand  red 
and  allowit      ......(  ) 

Item  to  certaine  poor  persones  at  Lambes  cowrt  conforme  to  ye  warrand  red 
and  allowit      ......(  ) 

Item  for  cloathes  to  William  Calderwood  and  furnishing  y^to       ix  ll  xv  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  ye  dark  for  WTytting  of  sex  bandis  evicting  ane  decreit  against  Gilbert 
Merschell  and  M''  John  Herbertsoun  furnishing  partchment  yJ'to     liiij  s. 

Mair  for  threttie  thrie  laidis  of  coallis  and  for  peittis  .  .         xxxj  s. 

Item  for  ane  coard  to  ye  bell  and  putting  vp  of  it  .  x  s.  viij  d. 

Item  for  a  spaid    .  .  .  .  •  xij  s.  vj  d. 

And  stenting  of  %'e  pallioun  .  .  .  .  .  ij  s.  viij  d. 

Mair  for  ane  tar  tow  to  the  bell  and  putting  vp  of  it  .  .  xvj  s. 

Item  ye  collector  lossit  of  ye  turnowr  when  he  gave  out  twa  for  ane  to  ye  poor 
folloks  .  .  .  .  .  .  v  ll  xvij  s. 

M^  lossit  be  turnof  lying  besyd  him  and  not  outit        .  .     iiij  li  x  s. 

Summa    of    the    haill    discharge    is         vj'^xxvij  ll  iij  s.  viij  d. 

Swa  charge  and  discharge  being  calculat  the  comptar  restis 
awand  ane  hundrethe  fyftie  sex  punds  ane  schiling  ten 
pennis. 


1641I       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.         209 

Quhairof  he  producit  ane  band  of  thrie  scoir  punds  awand  be  Robert 
Findley  last  collecto''  and  thair  is  allowit  to  himself  sex  pund  ane  schiling  ten 
pennis  for  los  of  moeyis  and  his  paines.  Swa  restis  four  scoir  ten  punds 
quhilk  he  is  ordanit  to  give  the  pnt  collecto"'  and  he  to  be  chargit  thairwith 
at  his  compt. 

The  said  day  Thomas  Scott  producit  of  burgess  and  gild  brother  silver 
extending  to  ane  hundrethe  twenty  sex  punds  sex  schilings  quhairof  he 
debursit  of  befor  Ix  ti  to  help  to  mak  out  ye  thowsand  markis  lent  to  Dauid 
Boyd  and  he  producit  thrie  scoir  sex  punds  sex  schiling  quhairof  thair  is 
allevin  schilingis  four  pennis  of  turno''  all  put  in  the  box  and  Peiter  Johnstoun 
is  awand  xxx  ll. 

The  said  day  William  Reid  maid  ane  compt  of  ye  small  dewties  conteanit  Money  put  in 
in  ye  rentall  quhairof  ye  haill  extendis  to  fyftie  fyve  pundis  nyntein  schilingis 
by  and  attour  thais  wha  hes  not  bein  in  vse  of  payment  this  lang  tyme  bygaine 
and  he  producit  twenty  nyne  schilings  for  Androw  Haddowie  that  he  was 
awand  sen  ye  last  zeir.  So  his  haill  charge  extendis  to  fyftie  seavin  pundis 
aught  schilings  quhairof  thair  is  allowit  to  him  for  his  awin  paines  fyve  pund 
nyne  schilings  so  restis  fyftie  ane  pund  nyntein  schilings  quhilk  with  the  money 
producit  be  Thomas  Scott  is  put  in  ye  box  extending  in  haill  to  ane  hundrethe 
aughtein  pundis  fyve  schilings. 

The  said  day  the  deacon  conveiner  producit  Nobilstouns  band  quhilk  is  Band 
put  in  the  box.  ^" 

The  said  day  it  is  concludit  and  ordanit  that  ye  deacon  conveiner  and  his  Salt  compt. 
collector  persew  Richart  Allane  befor  ye  dean  of  gild  and  his  bretherine  for  ye 
compt  of  ye  salt  and  ordaines  ye  deacones  of  ye  hammermen  and  tailzo^'s 
with  Robert  Hoggiszaird  Thomas  Scott  and  George  Lyoun  to  concur  and  asist 
them  in  name  of  ye  haill  deacons. 

Decimo  octavo  Noris  1640. 

The  said  day  Ritchart  Allane  producit  his  compt  of  ye  salt  and  ordaines 
William  Neilsone  bailzie  with  the  deacon  conveiner  Johne  Kirkwood  Robert 
Horner  Johne  Stewart  elder  and  George  Lyoun  to  meit  and  considder  y''vpon 
and  to  report  back  again  to  this  place. 

Secundo  Martij  Anno  Domini  1641. 

The  qlk  day  Johne  Duff  sone  law^  to  vmqi«  George  Duff  writter  in  Ed''  Prenteis  Duff, 
is  buikit  heirin  as  prenteis  with  Williame  Stalker  goldsmythe  burges  of  yis 
burghe  and  3'at  during  ye  space  of  nyn  zeiris  conforme  to  ye  indento''  daitit 
at  Glasgow  and  Ed""  ye  aught  and  {  )  dayis  of  December  jajvjc 

threttie  sevin  zeiris. 

o 


2IO 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1 641 


Cwn^-nghame 
prenteis. 


Warrand. 


Intimafjoun  of 
ane  act  anent 
ye  mo*!'  awin 
to  ye  factors 
01  Campheir. 


Report  anent 
ve  former  act. 


Prenteis 
Snodgres. 


Muscattis 
producit. 


xvij  Aprilis  1641. 

The  qlk  day  James  Cunynghame  sone  lawH  to  James  Cwnynghame  in 
Dwnwne  is  buikit  heirin  as  prenteis  with  Robert  Horner  tailzo^  burges  of  yis 
brughe  to  ser\-e  him  sevin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie 
conforme  to  ye  indento^  past  y^anent  of  ye  dait  ye  first  day  of  Januarij  jajvjc 
threttie  aught  zeiris. 

xiiij  Mai]  1641. 

The  said  day  ordanis  the  coUecto''  to  pay  to  Wilham  Calderwood  ten 
markis  monej'  for  ye  skouring  of  ye  muscatts  and  ye  said  \V"'  Calderwood 
to  hold  ye  same  clein  and  clear  till  Michaelmes  and  yat  for  ye  said  sowme. 

The  sd  day  it  is  ordanit  be  comoun  consent  that  ye  haill  new  dekins  who 
sould  giv  in  muscatts  for  this  pnt  zeir  that  they  have  y""  readie  and  produce 
them  heirvpon  ye  secund  day  of  Junij  nLxt  wnder  the  paine  of  ane  wnlaw 
of  iyve  pundis  by  and  atto^  ye  muscatt  with  ye  ptinentis. 

xviij  Maij  1641. 
The  said  day  the  dekine  conveinar  having  conveinit  ye  dekins  who  being 
all  pnt  verie  few  exceptit  some  sex  of  them  he  did  intimat  to  yem  yat  yis 
brughe  was  to  borrow  for  ye  vse  of  ye  publict  y  p*  of  ane  hundrethe  and  fyftie 
thousand  gilderis  awin  to  ye  facto'"s  of  Campheiris  and  desyred  ye  said  dekins 
to  covein  y  craftis  and  to  crave  y  opiniouns  thairanent  so  yat  if  it  sould  fall 
out  that  ye  towne  most  be  taxit  for  pav'  vairof  heirefter  no  man  sould  grudge 
or  refuiss  to  beir  thair  awin  ptis  and  ye  haill  dekins  pnt  promeissit  to  mak 
thair  repoirt  ye  morne  at  twa  hoi's  efternoone. 

xix  Maij  1641. 
The  said  day  ve  haill  dekins  of  craftis  compeirit  and  maid  y''  repoirt  that 
they  had  conveinit  yair  severall  treads  and  craftis  and  proponit  ye  overtour 
proponit  be  [?  to]  yem  be  ye  dekin  conveinar  ye  day  preceiding  anent  ye 
monej'es  awin  to  ye  factors  of  Campheir  and  maid  repoirt  yat  all  y  treadis 
and  assosiat  war  content  ye  money  sould  be  borrowit  and  if  it  fell  out  yat 
this  brugh  sould  be  taxit  for  itis  awin  p'  yairof  they  war  all  content  to  vndergo 
ye  same  according  to  yair  power  and  abilitie. 

xiiij  Junij  1641. 
The  said  day  James  Snodgres  sone  lawful!  to  Jo"  Snodgres  in  Abottisinche 
is  Iniikit  heirin  prenteis  to  James  Snodgres  cordoner  to  serve  him  fyve  zeiris 
as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indentour  of  Glasgow 
ye  allevint  day  of  Maij  last  was. 

Tertio  Aiigusij  1641. 
The  said  day  Richard  Flaikfield  Ro'  Patersone  and  Johne  M'^Lachlan 
gave  in  y  muscatts  with  staffis  and  bandaleiris  except  Ro*  Patersone  wantis 
his  bandileiris. 


1641J       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  211 

Nono  August]  1641. 

The  said  day  Jo°  Thomsoun  sone  lawfull  to  George  Thomsoune  warkman  xhomesone 
indweller  in  Glasgow  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  w'  Jo^  Patersone  weifer  to  serve  P''«°*<='=- 
him  sevin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the 
indentour  of  ye  dait  ye  xiij  day  of  No""  1640. 

Vndecimo  Augiislj  1641. 

The  said  day  the  dekine  conveinar  producit  the  sowme  of  fourtie  aught  Superplusof 
pundis  qlk  was  gottin  of  ye  superplus  of  ye  last  vento''  daills  qlk  is  all  delt  to  glvin  10% 
ye  poor.  p"""^^- 

The  said  day  Niniane  Gilhagie  conveinar  with  ye  dekinis  of  ye  craftis  of  Act  to  be 
this  brughe  and  y  bretherine  of  counsall  being  conveinit  in  y  hospitall  within  counsaii.  °  ^* 
ye  same  quho  taking  to  y  considera'un  that  ye  provest  baillies  and  counsall 
of  this  brughe  ar  to  petitioun  his  ma''^  for  the  electioun  of  yair  awin  magis- 
trats  qlk  thing  ye  said  dekin  conveinar  dekins  and  y  said  counsall  wisches 
most  earnestlie  to  fall  in  ye  tounes  awin  handis  thairfoir  and  for  removing  all 
jeluseis  to  ye  effect  ye  same  may  goe  moir  vnanimouslie  and  prosperouslie 
on  and  that  they  may  the  better  joyne  w'  ye  saidis  provest  baillies  and  counsall 
both  hart  hand  and  all  y  best  endevoris  for  obteaning  yoi  thes  ar  to  give 
warrand  to  ye  sd  Niniane  Gilhagie  dekine  conveinar  to  requeist  and  desyre 
the  saidis  provest  baillies  and  counsall  in  y  names  that  on  Saturday  nixt  it 
may  be  inactit  be  them  in  y  csall  buikis  that  ye  craftismen  sail  have  ye  lyk 
libertie  and  privilege  in  ye  magistratis  and  toun  counsall  yof  as  they  have 
had  heirtofoir  conforme  to  ye  ordouris  keipit  q"  the  electioun  of  ye  magistratis 
was  in  ye  handis  of  ye  bischopis  of  Glasgow  and  that  the  sd  act  to  be  set  doune 
yanent  may  beir  warrand  for  ratefieing  yof  on  ye  same  day  that  ye  magis- 
tratis of  this  brughe  beis  nixt  electit  and  befoir  ye  sd  electioun  in  respect  of 
ye  absence  of  such  of  ye  counsell  as  ar  absent  at  this  tyme  or  vpon  any  wy 
day  or  dayas  yefter  ye  dekine  conveinar  for  ye  tyme  sail  requyre  to  ye  effect 
ye  samyne  may  be  keipit  and  observit  inviolable  in  tyme  ciiing. 

The  said  day  ye  dekin  conveinar  Ninian  Gilhagie  Richard  Allane  Manasses  Certane 
Lyle  and  Jo"  Kirkwood  ar  appoyntit  to  ryd  to  Ed''  to  attend  ye  tounis  com-  fy"°o  E<i° 
missionaris  and  ye  effairis  of  ye  craftis  of  this  brughe  and  ordanis  ilk  ane  of 
them  to  have  xxx  s.  ilk  day  during  y  abod  yfoir  defraying  of  y  charges  by  and 
atto''  y  hors  hyre  and  ordaines  the  dark  to  giv  to  them  or  send  to  them  vpoun 
demand  ane  comissioun  for  mannaging  of  y  effairis. 


The  said  day  Daniell  Broune  dekine  of  chirurgianes  and  Georg  Browne  Muscattis 
ne  of  flescho's  hes  givin  i 
George  Brum  wantis  his  staf. 


dekine  of  flescho's  hes  givin  in  y''  muskatts  with  staf  and  bandaleiris  except  ^^°  "'^'' 


212 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1641 


Lyte  dekine 
conveiaar. 


Decimo  tertio  Octobris  1641. 

The  qlk  day  the  dekin  conveinar  and  dekine  of  craftis  with  ye  britherine 
of  y  counsall  being  convenit  in  y  hospitall  for  electing  of  three  of  y  number 
to  be  pnted  to  the  provest  baOUes  and  counsall  of  this  brughe  to  ye  effect 
that  ane  of  them  might  be  elected  dekine  conveinar  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  be 
pluralitie  of  voitis  Williame  Neilsoune  Johne  Andersone  and  Richard  Allane 
lait  baillies  war  elected  to  be  pnted  to  the  sds  provest  baillies  and  counsall 
to  ye  effect  foirsd  and  ordaines  ye  samy  to  be  pnted  be  Ro'  Hogzard  tanner. 


Decimo  quarto  Octohris  1641. 

Four  men  for  The  qlk  day  the  abovenamit  W""  Neilsoune  being  newlie  elected  dekin 

gfids^counsail.  conveinar  having  conveinit  the  haill  dekins  of  craftis  w'  y  britherine  of  counsall 
for  choysing  and  electing  of  four  psounes  of  y  number  to  be  on  the  dean  of  gild 
his  counsall  for  the  zeir  to  cum  be  pluralitie  of  voitis  Johne  Andersone  Gavin 
Neisbit  lait  baillies  Niniane  Gilhagie  and  Walter  Neilsoun  ar  elected  to  the 
effect  foirsd  and  ordaines  the  sd  dekine  conveinar  to  goe  and  present  the  sds 
persounes  and  to  sie  them  placit  and  buikit. 

xxvij  Octohris  1641. 

The  said  day  ye  persounes  following  ar  elected  and  nominat  to  be  coun- 
sellor's to  3'e  dekine  conveinar  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  quha  being  all  present  except 
a  few  markit  absent  gave  yair  aith  as  use  is. 

Dekins 


Arthor  Tacketis 
Ro'  Hogiszaird 
Peter  Johnstoune 
James  Padie 
Johne  Bochanan 
Patrik  Clark 


Geoig  Locheid 
John  Boyd 
Rot  Reid 
Androw  Muir 
Johne  Gilhagie 
Alex''  Colquhoune 
Thomas  Naismeth 


Manasses  Lyll 


Johne  Kirkwood 
Thomas  Myllar 
Johne  Scot 

Johne  Andersone 
Richard  Allane 
Johne  Listoune 


Androw  Snyp 
Georg  Lyon 

Johne  Stewart  elder 
Rot  Cauldwall 


1641]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW, 


213 


Jo"  Wilsoune 

Ro*  Finlay 
Williame  Coatis 

Gawin  Neisbit 
Ro'  Horner 
Patrick  Adame 
Jo"  Clark 
James  Ogilvie 
Rot  Boyd 
James  Man 


William  Hunter 
Patrick  Bar 

Thomas  Scot 
James  Robesoune 

Richard  Flaikfeild 
Johne  Patersone 


Patrik  Colquhoun 
James  Colquhoune 

Mr  James  Hamiltoun 


Walter  Dowglas 
William  Neilsoun  elder 
Niniane  Gilhagie 
Ro'  Patersoune 
William  Wilsoune 
Walter  Neilsoune 
Johne  Wallace 


Georg  Broome  zounger 
Ro'  Cochrane 


Johne  M<=Lachlen 

Georg  Muir 
W"i  Howie 
Thomas  Aetchesoune 
David  Jack 


The  said  day  William  Zair  is  continowit  clerk  wha  hes  gevin  his  aith  as  ciark 

VSe  is.  contimvit. 

The  said  day  be  pluralitie  of  voittis  Johne  Wallac  maltman  is  elected  Wallace 
and  chosen  collecto''  to  ye  dekin  conveinar  foi  ye  zeir  to  cum  wha  being  pnt 
acceptit  ye  sd  office  in  and  vpon  him  and  gave  his  aith  de  fideli  administra'ne 
yintill. 

The  said  day  Ninian  Gilhagie  lait  dekin  conveinar  pducit  ve  thre  hundrith  Legacie 

,  .  r  •     1     "     ■■    11  ,  lo   Gilhagie  put 

mkis  money  of  legacie  qlk  was  left  to  ye  poor  m  ye  craftis  hospitall  be  wmq'^  [in]  ye  box. 
Niniane  Gilhagie  his  wnkle  qlk  is  put  in  ye  box  except  fourtie  pundis  qlk  was 
takin  out  y^of  and  is  now  in  Ed''  for  ye  vse  of  ye  craftis. 

The  said  day  Walter  Neilsoune  producit  ye  haill  money  he  gat  ye  last  Money 
zeir  for  the  burgess  and  gild  brither  including  y^in  threttie  pundis  he  receavit  pu°t  inTheTox. 
fra  Jo^  M^Clachlen  for  his  gild  broy  fyne  extending  in  haill  to  ye  soume  of 
thre  scoir  allevin  pundis  iij  s.  and  viij  d.  qlk  was  put  in  ye  box. 


The  said   day  William  Wilsoune   lait   collecto''  maid  his  compt    of   his 


214  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1641 

intromissioune   with    the   hospitalls  guidis   ye   last    zeir  quhairof  charg    and 
discharg  followis. 

Charg. 

In  ye  first  receavit  be  him  fra  Wilham  Huntar  lait  collecto''  that  was  restand 

be  him  at  ye  making  of  his  compt      ....       Ixxxx  tt 

Item  receavit  from  ye  dekine  of  q^ter  comptis       .  j'^ilxij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  James  Boyd  for  ye  anuall  of  iiijc  ti  awand  be  him  fra  Mtimes 

1639  ^^  Mtimes  1640  .....        xxxij  li 
Item  fra  James  Blair  of  Adamtoune  for  ye  anuall  of  twa  hundreth  mk  allouing 

ye  tent  penny  the  said  zeir     .  .  .  .  ix  li  xij  s. 

Item  fra  David  Colquhoune  for  ye  anuall  of  v^^  tl  fra  Mtimes  1639  to  Mtimes 

1640  ......  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  ye  L/  of  Nobleferme  for  the  anuall  of  v"^  mark  j'e  said  zeir       xxiiij  ll 
Item  fra  Charles  Polok  for  ye  anuall  of  ij  <=  ll  ane  zeir  preceiding  Witsonday 

1640    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  16  li 

Item  fra  Ro'  Boyd  of  Tourgild  for  ye  anuell  of  ane  aj  mkis  fra  Mtimes  1639  to 

Mtimes  1640    .......        xlviij  li 

Mair  fra  him  for  the  anuall  yof  fra  the  sd  tme  to  Witsounday  yeft 

xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  fra  Gavin   Neisbit   for  the  anuall  of  v<=  ll  fra  Mtimes  1639  to  Mtimes 

1640    ........       xxxvj  ll 

Item  fra  James  Scheillis  in  name  of  his  sone  for  ye  anuall  of  ane  hundreth 

mkis  ye  sd  zeir  .  .  .  .  v  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  M""  Gawin  Hamiltoune  for  the  anuall  of  twa  hundreth  punds  ye  tmes 

of  Mtimes  1640  and  Witsounday  1641  .  .  .  16  ll 

Item  fra  David  Boyd  for  ye  anuall  of  j^J  mks  ye  twa  termes  abovewryttin 

hij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  receavit  fra  Richard    Allane  in  name  of    ye  ex'''^  of  wmq'^  M""    James 

Fullartoune  for  ye  anuall  of  v<^  mks  fra  the  tmes  of  Mtimes  1639  to  Mtimes 

1640    ........         xxiiij  ll 

Item  fra  James  Smyth  for  ye  anuell  of  v<=  iiiks  fra  Mtimes  1640  to  Witsounday 

last     ......  xiij  ll  vij  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  Jo°  Andersone  zounger  for  ye  anuall  of  fyve  hundreth  ihkis  ye  tmes 

of  Mtimes  and  Witsounday  last  ....        xxiiij  ll 

Item  fra  Macome  Crawfurd    for  ye  anuell  of  v<=  marks  fra  Mtimes  1639  to 

Mtimes  1640    .......        xxiiij  ll 

Item  fra  Ro'  Horner  in  name  of  M'  Niniane  Campbell  for  ye  anuall  of  j'=  ll 

ye  tmes  of  Mtimes  and  Witsounday  last  .  .  .  viij  t 

Item  receavit  fra  James  Trane  in  name  of  ye  ex'''^  of  wmq'^  Jo°  Or  of  legacie 

left  be  him  to  ye  poor  .  .  .  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  ye  laine  of  ane  moirt  claith  ...  xij  s.  iiij  d. 

646  ll  i8s.  8d.  Suma  of  ye  charge  is        .  vj^xlvj  ll  xviij  s.  viij  d. 


1641]       RECORDS   OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  215 

Discharg. 
In  ye  first  debvirsit  to  certane  poor  persounes  at  Hallowmes  court  conforme 
to  ye  warrand  .  .  .  .  •  xix  li  xvij  s. 

Item  mair  to  ye  poor  at  Candlines  court  conforme  to  ye  warrand 

xxviij  ti  viij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  mair  to  yem  at  Belten  court  cyform  to  ye  warrand  xxiij  li  xij  s. 
Item  debursit  to  Johne  Marschell  for  John  Naper  to  help  to  pay  ye  few  deutie 

of  his  hous      .  .  .  .  .  .  ■  X  ll 

Item  to  Wilham  Calderwood  for  twa  pair  of  schoone  .  .  iij  li 

Mair  to  him  at  severall  tymes  to  by  oyle  dohe       .  .  .  xxx  s. 

Mair  to  him  conforme  to  ane  warrand        .  .  .     vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  helping  of  the  bell  leid  and  warkmanschip  .  .        xxiiij  s. 

Item  to  ye  clerk     .  .  .  .  .  •  •  xx  li 

Item  to  ye  colledg  collector  for  vmqic  M'  Jo"  Howiesounes  bursar  ye  tmes  of 

Mtimes  and  Witsounday  last  .  .  Ixvj  H  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  twa  pair  of  scheitis  and  twa  coveringis  to  Gavin  Leyis  and  Andro 

Gray  .  .  .  .  .  •  .       ix  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  for  ane  pair  of  scheitis  to  Jo"  Geddes  .  .         iij  li  j  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  ane  pair  of  scheitis  and  ane  covering  to  Ro*  Fischar  iiij  li  xij  s. 
Item  for  ane  pair  of  scheitis  to  Wn^  Weir  .  .  .  Iiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  aught  ells  and  ane  quarter  of  cloath  to  be  cloathis  to  Gavin  Leyis  at 

xiij  s.  the  ell  and  for  furnisching  yairto  .  xix  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  for  twa  pair  of  hois  to  Andrew  Gray  and  Johne  Geddes        .  Iij  s. 

Item  for  ane  buccat  ......  vuj  s. 

Item  for  ane  borrow  .  .  .  .  •  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  for  twa  load  of  lyme  .  .  .  •  •  xxij  s. 

Item  for  four  load  of  sand  .  .  .  .  •  vuj  s. 

Item  to  Mathow  Colquhoune  for  stenting  and  dressing  ye  tent  at  twa  severall 

tymes  ....-••        xxxij  s. 

Item  for  regrating  of  S""  Thomas  Boydis  band  and  raising  Ires  yairvpon  iiij  ll 
Item  to  Jo"  Nicoll  for  coppieing  a  minnit  of  ye  actis  of  plianient  v  h  viij  s. 
Item  to  Thomas  Southerland  for  poynting  ye  hospitall  furnisching  ten  cast  of 

sklait  fog  naillis  and  certane  glas  losanes         .  .  vj  ll  iiij  s. 

Item  for  setting  vp  ane  tumber  lumb  in  ye  vent  in  ye  laich  hous  in  ye  hospitall 

and  furnisching  necessaris  yto  .  •  •  xxx  s.  vuj  d. 

Item  to  Mr  Ard  Lome         .  .  .  .  •  .  xij  s. 

Item  to  ye  dekine  conveinar  for  his  hors  hyre  ye  tyme  he  raid  to  Tome  Boydis 

buriall  .  .  .  .  .  •  •  xl  s. 

Item  to  ye  sax  poor  men  in  ye  hospitall  to  ilk  ane  of  yem  quarthe  viij  li 

inde  j'^lxxxxij  li 
Item  to  ye  four  stipendieris  .  .  •  Iiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  for  coUis  and  peitis  to  ye  hospitall        .  .  xviij  ll  iij  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  for  strae  to  ye  poor  mens  bedis  ....        xxnij  s. 


2i6  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1641 


Money 
producit. 


Ite  debursit  to  James  Smythe  to  mak  out  his  fyve  hundreth  mkis  yat  was  lent 
to  him  .  .  .  .  .  XV  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 


Suma  of  ye  discharge  is 


v^xxv]  li  ix  s. 


Money  put  in 
ye  box. 


Augmen- 
tatioun  to  ye 
poor  in  ye 
hospitall. 


And  so  charg  and  discharge  being  calculat  ye  compto''  is  awand 
in  ane  hundreth  twentie  pundis  ix  s.  viij  d. 

Qlk  soume  of  ane  hundreth  twentie  pundis  ix  s.  viij  d.  was  producit  be 
ye  said  Wilhame  Wilsoune  on  ye  boord  and  Wilham  Reid  offi''  producit  fyftie 
fyve  punds  xix  s.  qlk  he  had  collected  be  ye  rentell  q'"of  he  got  bak  for  his 
serving  v  ll  viij  s.  and  so  rested  fyftie  punds  allevin  schUling  qlk  haill  soumes 
producit  be  ye  sdis  William  Wilsoune  and  W™  Reid  and  debursit  as  foUouis  viz 
to  Niniane  Gilhagie  for  his  charges  at  severall  tymes  24  days  in  Ed''  and  for 
his  hors  hyre  and  for  xlij  s.  spent  with  Gabriell  Conynghame  q"  he  gat  the 
kingis  Ire  and  for  xij  s.  was  givin  to  M''  Ar<i  Lome  .  xlix  ll  viij  d. 

Item  to  Manasses  Lyll  for  his  charges  17  daj?es  in  Ed"'  and  hors  hyre 

xxxij  ll  x  s. 

Item  to  Johne  Kirkwood  for  ye  lyk  .  .  .  xxxij  ll  x  s. 

Item  to  Richard  Allane  for  ye  lyk  rebaiting  yairof  ye  twentie  mkis  he  was  awin 

to  ye  hospitall  for  ye  salt  compt  .  .  .     xix  ll  iij  s.  iiij  d. 

Extending  in  haill  to  ....  .        j<^xxxiij  ll  iiij  s. 

Sua  restis  of  ye  haill  money  pducit  as  sd  is  be  ye  sdis  W™  Wilsoun 
and  W™  Reid  qlk  is  put  in  ye  box  .         xxxvij  ll  xvj  s.  viiij  d. 

xij  of  No^  1 64 1. 

The  said  day  ye  dekine  convener  and  dekines  of  craftis  and  yair  britherine 
of  counsall  vnderstanding  yat  ye  sax  poor  men  in  yair  hospitall  can  hardly 
leive  now  in  vis  strait  tyme  all  viveris  being  so  deir  and  thairfoir  they  have 
concludit  all  in  ane  voice  yat  ilk  ane  of  yem  sail  have  fourtie  schillingis  of 
augmenta^un  quarterly  to  compleit  yem  ten  pundis  in  ye  quarter  and  for 
suppheing  heirof  ye  craftis  following  vndertakis  and  promeiss  to  pay  mair 
zeirly  to  ye  collector  nor  they  wont  to  do  befoir  viz  : 


Ye  cordoneris 

x  ll 

The  tailzors 

xH 

The  baxteris 

iij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

The  skjmnaris 

xls. 

The  couperis 

xls. 

The  maissounes 

xl  s. 

The  wrytis 

xls. 

The  weifers 

•  (        ) 

The  cherurgians 

•  (        ) 

1642]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.         217 

The  fleschors  ......-(  ) 

The  bonatmakeris  .  .  .  .  •  •     (  ) 

The  maltmen  .  .  .  .  •  •  •     (  ) 

The  said  day  ye  collector  isordainit  to  accept  fra  Peter  Johnstoun  fyftyne  Coilecto' to  be 
pundis  in  satisfactioun  of  his  gildrie  fyne  and  he  to  be  comptable  yairfoir  at  "  ^^' ' 
his  nixt  compt  and  of  fourtie  pundis  viij  d.  wes  now  receaved  be  him  yat  was 
takin  out  of  vmqie  Niniane  Gilhagies  legacie  and  sent  to  Ed''  and  was  bro* 

home  againe. 

Septimo  Fe'<>  1642. 

The  said  day   lohne  Bowie  son  law'i  to  Johne  Bowie  in  Badintroch  is  Bowie 
bookit  heirin  prenteis  w'  Ro'  Blair  weifer  to  serve  him  sevin  zeins  as  prenteis 
and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  cyform  to  ye  indentor  of  ye  dait  of  yir  pntis. 

xi  of  Fe">  1642. 
The  said  day  ye  three  Ires  yat  was  takin  out  of  ye  box  of  befoir  to  get  ane  Letteres  put  in 
new  Ire  yfoir  swbscryved  be  his  maj  ar  put  yin  againe  and  ordaines  ye  coilecto"'  ^^ 
to  pay  to  Williame  Neilsone  ten  markis  he  debursed  in  suiting  of  ye  sd  new 
Ire. 

The  said  day  Alex^  Holmes  is  ordanit  to  giv  Johne  Scot  his  lait  prenteis  Holmes  and 
ane  discharge  of  his  prenteischipe  and  indentof  past  betuixt  yem  and  ordanis 
ye  sd  Johne  Scot  to  giv  to  his  maister  ane  discharge  of  all  bygane  dues  and  yis 
to  be  done  and  ilk  ane  of  them  betuixt  and  this  day  aught  dayes. 

The  said  day  Georg  Shirilaw  weifer  and  David  Leslie  hammermane  ar  Schirilaw  and 
admit  and  receaved  as  twa  of  ye  ordinaris  in  ye  hospitall  and  ordanes  yem  to  hospuS. 
be  susteanit  yin  conforme  to  ye  comoun  ordo^  and  they  to  be  lyable  to  ye 
injunctiounes  set  doun  yairanent. 

The  said  day  ordanes  ye  collector  to  pay  to  Thomas  Naismaithe  maltmane  Warrand. 
xiij  I1  X  s.  for  causis  known  to  this  place  and  to  pay  to  Ro'  Findlay  cordoner 
XX  markis  for  ye  extraordinar  paines  he  took  q"  he  was  last  collector  in  recept 
and  delyverie  of  ye  last  venter  salt. 

The  said  day  ye  dekine  conveiner  and  dekins  of  craftis  and  yair  britherine  Poore. 
[convened]  and  vnderstanding  yat  ye  poor  increasses  dayle  ye  contrabitioun 
is  evill  payit  and  yat  ye  poor  wha  hes  bein  keiped  in  houss  yairvpon  to  ye  great 
credit  of  yis  citie  ar  now  lyklie  to  breck  lous  to  ye  dishonour  yairof  as  also 
considering  yat  thair  ar  certane  poor  dayly  comand  fra  Ireland  who  most  be 
helped,  thairfoir  it  is  concludit  w'  ane  consent  yat  ilk  dekine  pay  into  ye 
coilecto""  ye  thrid  pt  of  yat  they  pay  zeirly  to  ye  hospitall  whUk  will  extend 
new  to  ane  hundreth  markis  money  and  q*  ye  same  sail  want  of  twa  hundrethe 
inks  ordanis  yat  it  be  takin  out  of  ye  box  and  gevin  to  ye  kirk  sessioun  to 
ye  effect  foirsd  and  this  to  stand  for  supplie  of  ye  pnt  strait  allanerly. 


2lS 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1642 


Baxter 

prenteis. 


Warraiid. 


Aneiit  the 
gildric  fyiie. 


New  dekines 
muscatts. 


Prenteis 
Cauldwall. 


Bogill 
prenteis. 


Muskatis 
produced. 


Bands 
produced. 


Warrand. 


Prima  Martij  1642. 
The  said  day  Johne  Baxter  sone  lawfull  to  Mareone  ^I^Elaster  servitrix 
to  Niniane  Gilhagie  merchand  is  buiked  heir  in  prenteis  w'  Johne  Reid  elder 
armourer  to  serve  him  fyv^e  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  for  meit  and  fie  conforme 
to  ye  indento''  of  ye  dait  ye  saxt  day  of  Januarij  1640. 

xiij  of  Maij  1642. 
The  sd  day  it  is  ordanit  yat  ye  dekine  convenar  give  to  Thomas  Naismith 
maltmane  for  his  supphe  fyftie  markis  money  out  of  ye  moneyes  yat  was 
collected  out  for  ye  vse  of  ye  poor. 

The  said  day  it  is  statut  and  ordanit  yat  in  na  tyme  heireftir  any  demution 
be  granted  to  any  persoun  of  q'  qualitie  q'sover  of  yair  gildrie  fynes  for 
eschewing  of  abusses  and  the  same  nevir  to  be  put  in  voiting  heireftir. 

The  said  day  ordanes  ye  new  dekines  to  produce  yar  muskaits  on  ye  aught 
of  Junij  nixt  vnder  ye  pane  of  fyve  pundis  by  and  attc  j-e  muskatis. 

Prima  Jiilij  1642. 
The  said  day  Thomas  Cauldwall  sone  lawfull    to    Johne  Cauldwall  in 
Auchingawin  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Johne  Steuart  zounger  maissoune 
to  serve  as  prenteis  and  servand  nyne  zeiris  conforme  to  ye  indcnto''  past 
betuixt  them  of  ye  dait  of  thir  pntis. 

Decimo  octavo  Jtdij  1642. 
The  said  day  Williame  Bogill  sone  lawfull  to  Johne  Bogill  in  Carmyll  is 
buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Walter  M^^Calme  cordoner  to  serve  him  sevin  zeir 
as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indentour  of  ye  dait 
ye  xiij  day  of  Junij  last. 

xij  of  August  1642. 

The  said  day  Robert  Reid  dekine  of  ye  wryghtis  produced  his  muskat 
with  stalf  and  bandeleiris  and  Androw  Muir  dekine  of  ye  chyrurgians  produced 
his  muskat  with  bandeleiris  and  sicklyk  Ro'  Hoggiszard  dekine  of  ye  cordoneris 
produced  (  ). 

The  same  day  ye  dekine  conveinar  produced  twa  bands  viz  ane  granted 
be  ye  provest  baillies  and  counsall  of  this  brughe  for  ane  thowsand  pundis 
money  and  ye  wther  granted  be  M'  James  Fullartounes  relict  as  prin'i  and 
Richard  Allane  hir  cau''  for  payment  of  ane  hundreth  markis  mony  both  put 
in  ye  box. 

The  said  day  ordanes  ye  collectour  to  pay  to  Ro'  Myllar  maltmane  for 
his  help  and  supplie  being  robed  in  Irland  fyftie  markis  money  restand  of  ye 
hundreth  markis  }-at  was  collected  be  dekins  for  ye  vse  of  ye  poor  and  to  pay 
to  him  ten  markis  farder. 


1642]       RECORDS  OF  THE   TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.         219 

The  said  day  ye  coUecto''  declaired  yat  he  had  receaved  fra  ye  exeCs  of  Legacies, 
vmq'e  M""  Thomas  Hutchesoune  twa  hundreth  markis  money    and    fra  ye 
exeors  of  vmq'e  M^  Johne  Hutchesoun  of  Scottistoune  ane  hundreth  markis 
money  and  fra  ye  exeo^s  of  vmq'e  (  )  ten  markis  money 

left  in  legacie  to  ye  poor  of  ye  hospitall  and  ordanes  him  to  be  chargit  yairwith 
at  ye  making  of  his  compt. 

The  sd  [day]  James  Schelles  cordoner  is  admittit  ane    of    ye    ordinar 
pentionars. 

xxij  of  August  1642. 

The  said  day  David  Scot  wryght  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  w'  James  Reid  Scot  prenteis. 
wryght  called  mid  James  to  serve  him  sevine  zeiris  conforme  to  ye  indentour 
of  ye  dait  ye  xj  day  of  August  1637. 

Sectindo  Sepiembris  1642. 

The  said  day  ordanes  ye  collecto''  to  give  to  Claud  Sprewll  cowper  for  his  Warrand. 
help  and  supplie  and  advancnient  againe  to  his  calling  being  robed  in  Irland 
fyftie  marks. 

xii  of  October  1642. 

The  whilk  day  ye  lait  dekine  conveiner  with  ye  dekins  of  craftis  and  yair 
counsall  being  convenit  for  electing  of  twa  of  yair  number  to  be  presentit 
with  Williame  NeOsoune  ye  said  lait  dekine  conveinar  to  ye  provest  baillies 
counsall  of  this  brughe  and  wthers  havand  enteres  to  ye  effect  ane  of  them 
might  be  electit  dekine  conveinar  for  ye  zeir  to  cum  be  pluralitie  of  votis 
Richard  Allane  and  Walter  Neilsoune  ar  electit  to  be  presentit  with  ye  said 
lait  dekine  conveinar  to  ye  effect  foirsaid. 

xiij  of  October  1642. 

The  quhilk  day  ye  said  Williame  Neilsoune  being  electit  dekine  conveinar 
of  befoii-  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  did  conveine  yis  day  with  ye  dekines  of  craftis 
old  and  new  and  bretherine  of  yair  counsall  for  electing  four  persounes  of 
yair  number  to  be  on  ye  deane  of  gild  his  counsall  for  ye  crafts  of  yis  brughe 
for  ane  zeir  to  come.  Be  pluralitie  of  voitis  Richard  Allane  cordoner  Manasses 
Lyill  skynnar  Niniane  Gilhagie  maltmane  and  Johne  Bochannane  baxter  ar 
electit  to  ye  effect  foirsaid. 

XV  of  October  1642. 

The  said  day  ye  said  dekine  conveinar  with  ye  haill  dekins  being  convenit 
and  sindrie  speciall  men  of  ye  craftis  ye  dekins  with  yair  consentis  electit  ye 
persounes  following  to  be  on  yair  counsall  for  ane  zeir  to  come. 


220 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1642 


Johne  M<=Ben 
Johne  Wilsoun 
Patrick  Adame 
Williame  Huntar 
Thomas  Scott 
Johne  Falconer 

Arthour  Tackettis 
Johne  Scot  elder 
Johne  Reid 
Daniell  Inglis 
Robert  Wilsoune 


Richard  Allane 
Robert  Hoggiszaird 
Williame  Cottis 
Robert  Finlay 
Adame  Wilsoun 


Dekins 
Jo°  Andersone 
baillie 


Georg  Lyoun 

Johne  Stewart  zounger 

Mathow  Colquhoune 

Mr  James  Hamiltone 

Walter  NeUsoune 

Ro*  Finnic 

David  Robisonne 


James  Colquhoune 
Robert  Reid 
Andrew  Muir 


Walter  Dowglas 
Niniane  Gilhagie 
Johne  Gilhagie 
Robert  Patersoun 
William  Ly'bodie 


Alexander  Colquhoun 
George  Broome  zounger 

Thomas  Naismith 


George  Muir 

Williame  Howie 
Thomas  Athesoun 


Gawin  Neisbit 
Peter  Johnestoun 
Robert  Boyd 
Robert  Horner 
James  Scott 
Manasses  Lyill 
James  Padie 

Johne  Bochannane 
Johne  Scott 

Patrick  Clark 
Johne  Patersoun 

Georg  Lochheid 
Johne  Zounge 

Johne  Boyd 

Vigesimo  primo  Octohris  1642. 
The  said  day  Johne  Wallace  lait  collectour  maid  his  compt  of  his  intro- 
missioune  of  ye  hospitallis  goods  since  his  admissioune  quhairof  chairge  and 
dischairg  foUowes. 


1642]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  221 

Chairge. 

In  ye  first  receaved  fra  Macolme  Crawfurd  of  Cartisburne  for  ye  anwel  of  fyve 

hundreth  markis  fra  Mertimes  1640  zeiris  to  Mertimes  1641 

xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  fra  Gawine  Neisbit  for  the  anwell  of  fyve  hundreth  pundis  ye  said  zeir 

xlll 
Item  fra  James  Boyd  of  (  )  for  the  anwell  of  four  hundreth  pundis 

fra  Mertimes  1640  zeiris  to  Candlemas  1642  at  qlk  tyme  ye  prin"  sowme 

was  payed  and  put  in  ye  box  .  .  .  .  xl  ll 

Item  fra  S''  Thomas  Boyd  for  the  anwell  of  twa  hundreth  pundis  fra  Mtimes 

1638  to  Mertimes  1640  .....        xxxij  ll 

Item  fra  M^  Gawin  Hamiltoune  for  ye  anwell  of  twa  hundreth  fra  Witsounday 

1641  to  Mertimes  thaireftir  at  qlk  tyme  ye  prin'i  sowme  was  payed  and 

put  in  ye  box  ......  viij  ll 

Ite  fra  Charles  Pollock  for  ye  anwell  of  twa  hundreth  pundis  fra  Witsounday 

1640  to  Witsounday  1641        .....  xvj  li 

Item  fra  James  Scheillis  for  ye  anwal  of  ane  hundreth  markis  fra  Mertimes 

1640  to  Mertimes  1641  .  .  .  .       v  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  David  Colquhoune  for  ye  anwell  of  fyve  hundreth  markis  fra  Mertimes 

1640  to  Mertimes  1641  .  .  .  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  fra  Robert  Boyd  of  Tourgill  for  ye  anwell  of  ane  thousand  marks  fra 

Witsounday  1641  to  Mertimes  yaireftir  .  xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  ye  relict  of  vrnq'^  M'  Jas  Fullartoune  for  ye  anwell  of  fyve  hundreth 

marks  fra  Mertimes  1640  to  Mertimes  1641    .  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  ye  Laird  of  Noblisferme  for  ye  anwall  of  fyve  hundreth  marks  ye  said 

zeir     ......  xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  James  Blair  of  Adamtoune  for  ye  anwell  of  twa  hundreth  mkis  ye 

samyne  zeir     .  .  .  .  .  .      .x  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  David  Boyd  for  the  anwall  of  ane  thousand  rfikis  fra  Witsounday 

1641  to  Witsounday  last  ....     Iiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  fra  James  Smyth  for  ye  anwall  of  fyve  hundreth  markis  ye  said  zeir 

xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  receaved  quhilk  came  out  of  Ed^  and  was  left  yair  ye  27  of  October  last 

x.xxix  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  receaved  fra  Robert  Findlay  lait  collectour  in  compleit  payment  of  his 
restis  at  ye  making  of  his  compt  .  .  Ixix  ll  j  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  receaved  fra  ye  dekins  collectit  amongst  them  for  ye  vse  of  ye  poor 

Ixv  li  vij  s.  viij  d. 
Item  of  legacie  fra  ye  exeo''s  of  vmq'^  Androw  Mairteine      vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  M^itein. 
M  of  legacie  fra  exeoi's  of  \Tnq'^  M''  Thomas  Hutchesoun    j<^xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d.  Legacie 
M  of  legacie  fra  ye  exeo's  of  vmq'^  M"'  Johne  Hutchesoun  of  Scottistoune       Le^acie^""^ 

Ixvj  i   xiij  S.   iiij  d.   Hutchesone. 


222  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1642 

Legacie  M""  of  legacie  fra  ve  exeo''s  of  vrnq'^  Tohne  Andirsoun  tanner     xxvi  ll  xiii  s.  iiii  d. 

Andersone.         ,-,      r  i  •      ,•  ^  ,     t^       •,     t^   i,  ,       ■  \.      •••        ••••    •. 

Legacie  Bell.     JI  of  legacie  fra  ye  exeo''s  of  vmq'^  Patrik  Bell     .  Ixvj  u  xiij  s.  mj  d. 

Ite  receaved  fra  ye  dekines  of  quarter  comptis       .  .       j^lxxxxiij  ll  x  s. 

Item  for  ye  mort  cloathes  .....  iiij  ll 

Suma  of  the  chairg  is  .  .  .       j^xxxvij  ll  v  s. 

Dischairge. 

In  ye  first  to  Williame  Wilsoun  last  collectour  for  his  paines       iij  ll  vj  s.  viiij  d. 

Item  to  ye  offir      .  .  .  .  .  .  .  iij  ll 

Item  to  divirs  poor  persounes  for  y  supplie  at  ye  four  ordinair  courtis  viz 
Hallowmes  Canlmas  Belten  and  Lammas  conforme  to  ye  four  severall 
warrands  produced       .....(  ) 

Item  to  Johne  Marschell  for  Johne  Naper  to  help  to  pay  ye  fyftie  punds  ye 
hous  wndertook  for  him  to  help  to  pay  ye  few  dewtie  of  his  hous        x  ll 

Item  for  ane  kist  and  wining  scheit  to  Williame  Weir         iij  ll  xij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  waned  of  expenss  at  Ro'  Fischar  buriall        .  .  .  viij  ll 

Item  to  Thomas  Naismaith  for  his  supplie  and  to  Ro*  Finlay  for  ye  panis  takine 
be  him  at  ye  recept  and  delyverie  of  ye  last  ventar  salt  conforme  to  ye 
warrand  repiue  .....     x.xvj  ll  xvj  s.  8d. 

Ite  debursed  for  cloathe  to  be  cloathes  to  ye  poor  men  in  ye  hous  sark  scheitis 
and  making  of  them  conforme  to  ye  pticular  compt  yairof  red  and  allouit 

(  ) 

Item  debursed  to  ye  dekine  conveinar  qlk  he  gave  out  in  Ed''  anent  ye  seeking 

of  ane  Ire  yair  for  behove  of  ye  hous  from  ye  king        vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  debursed  to  Robert  Finlay  conforme  to  his  band  pduced  j"^  ll 

Item  to  ye  dark  .  .  .  .  .  .  xx  ll 

Item  for  the  extract  of  ye  partcles  of  ye  testamentis  anent  legaces  xij  s. 

Item  to  Andro  Lyill  for  ye  making  of  ye  poor  menis  cloathis  by  and  attour 

ye  anwal  rent  of  ye  fourty  pund  he  is  awand  to  ye  vse  .  iiij  ll 

Item  to  Johne  Bryssoune  mess''  for  ye  giving  ane  chairg  to  S^  Thomas  Boyd 

xij  s. 
Item  to  Robert  Myllar  maltmane  for  his  supplie        .  .  .  xl  li 

Item  to  Claud  SprewU  couper  for  his  supplie  .  xxxiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  ye  colledge  collecto''  for  yair  hous  bursour  conforme  to  his  dischairg 

Ixvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  to  ye  four  pensouners  .  .  .  Iiij  ll  vj  s.   viij  d. 

Item  gevin  to  ye  sax  poor  men  in  ye  hous  .  .  .  ijf^xl  li 

Item  gevin  for  coallis  and  peitis  to  ye  hous  .  .  xxiij  ll  xj  s. 

Item  for  strae  to  yair  beddis  .....        xxxij  s. 

Suiha  of  ye  discharg  is  .  .  .  i.\<=xiiij  ll  x  s. 


1642]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  223 

Swa  chairg  and  discharg  being  calculat  ye  compter  is  fund 
restand  awand  in  ane  hundreth  threttie  twa  pund  fyftyne  schillings 
quhilk  ye  collecto""  is  ordainit  to  give  to  ye  nixt  collector  and  he  to 
be  chargit  yairwith. 

The  said  day  Walter  Neilsone  producit  ye  haill  money  he  gat  ye  zeir  Moaey  boxed, 
pceiding  fra  ye  burgess  and  gild  brey'  including  yairin  30  ll  gottine  fra  Williame 
30  ll  fra  Artho''  Tackelis  and  15  ll  fra  Peter  Johnsoune  for  yair  gildrie  fynes 
extend  in  haill  to  .  .  .  .  .  .  j^xxv  ll  iij  s. 

Quhairof  he  debursed  to  Thomas  Naismeth  for  his  supplie     xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Swa  restis  quhilk  is  put  in  ye  box  .  .  Ixxxxj  ll  xvj  s.  iiij  d. 

The  same  day  Williame  Reid  maid  compt  of  ye  small  anwalis  contenit  Money  boxed, 
in  ye  rentull  extending  to  ....      Ivj  ll   iiij  s.   ij  d. 

Quhairof  yair  is  delyverit  to  him  for  his  paines      .  .  v  li  viij  s. 

Swa  restis  qlk  is  put  in  ye  bo.x      .  .  .  .  1  li  xvj  s.  ij  d. 

The  said  day  ye  foirnamit  Johne  Wallace  is  continoued  collecto''  for  ane  Collecto'. 
zeir  to  come  quha  being  pnt  accepted  ye  said  office  in  and  vpon  him  and  gave 
his  aith  de  fideli  administra' ne  yairintill  and  gat  of  ye  foirsd  money  produced 
be  Walter  Neilsone  aught  markis  for  his  panis  and  chairgis  in  collecting  ye 
hous  rentall  ye  last  zeir  and  he  hes  gottine  vp  ane  double  angell  that  is  light 
to  be  givine  bak  to  Artho""  Tacketis  to  get  ane  better  for  it  or  wy  money. 

The  said  day  ye  bandis  of  Elerslie  and  Noblestoune  ar  delyvered  to  ye  Bandis  takin 
collector  to  he  put  to  executioune  w'  j-e  Ires  of  horning  against  S""  Thomas  °"'' 
Boyd. 

The  said  day  yair  is  put  in  ye  box  ane  band  granted  be  Ro*  Finlay  for  Band  Finlay 
ane  hundreth  pundis  money  dew  to  [be]  payed  at  Mtimes  nixt  with  ane  zeiris    °'"  ' 
anwal  rent. 

The  said  day  ye  keyis  of  ye  box  ar  dely\-erit  to  ye  dekins  of  ye  hammermane  Keis. 
tailzoi's  and  visitour  of  maltmane. 

The  said  day  the  clerk  and  officer  is  continowed. 

xxj  of  November  1642. 

The  said  day  ordanis  ye  collecto''  to  pay  to  Thomas  Naismaith  lait  dekine  Warrand. 
of  ye  bonatmakeris  for  his  help  and  supplie  twentie  markis  money. 

The  said  day  the  dekine  conveinar  and  haill  dekines  with  advyse  of  yair  Bursarie 
counsall  wha  war  for  ye  maist  pairt  pnt  hes  gevine  and  granted  and  be  ye  i-'K'"bodie. 
tenno''  heirof  gives  and  grantis  to  Williame  Ly'bodie  lawfull  sone  to  Williame 
Ly'bodie  maltmane  that  vaikand  place  of  bursarie  w'in  ye  Colledge  of  Glasgow 


224 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1642 


Bands 
producit. 


Band. 


Spence  in 
hospitall. 


Prenteis 
RiddeU. 


Salt. 


Band  boxit. 


Neilsone 
legacie. 


Cowperis. 


at  yair  gift  and  pnta'une  conforme  to  vmqie  M''  Johne  Howisounes  funda'une 
and  does  heirby  will  and  desyre  ye  prin'i  and  regentes  of  ye  said  vniversitie 
to  admit  and  receave  him  yairto  at  Michalmes  nixt. 

xiij  of  Febrtiar  1643. 

The  said  day  the  collectour  produced  againe  Elerslie  and  Noblstounes 
bandes  and  ar  put  in  the  box. 

The  tounes  band  oi  i^i  ll  and  James  Clelandis  of  iii<=  markis  ar  takine  out 
of  ye  boxe  and  the  iij<^  markis  money  put  yairine  and  ye  ']^i  ll  is  to  be  receaved. 

The  said  day  Mitchell  Spence  bonatmaker  is  admitit  and  receaved  to  be 
ane  of  the  number  of  ye  sex  poor  men  [in]  ye  hospitall  conforme  as  wthers 
of  ye  lyik  ar. 

Ordaines  the  collector  to  give  to  Manasses  Lyill  to  be  gevine  to  W™ 
Duncanes  wyf  (  ). 

20  of  Fe">  1643. 

The  said  day  Andro  Riddell  sone  lawi'  to  vmq"  James  RiddeU  in  Blairfud 
is  bulked  heirin  prenteis  with  Johne  Glen  baxter  burges  of  yis  brughe  to  serve 
him  seavine  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye 
indentor  of  ye  dait  of  yur  pntis. 

10  of  Marche  1643. 

The  said  day  the  vento''  salt  broght  in  be  (  )  and  (  ) 

maissoune  quhilkis  falls  to  this  hous  is  sold  to  Georg  Lyoune  and  his  p'niers 
at  least  swa  meikle  yairof  as  ye  dekines  will  not  take. 

xij  of  March  1643. 

The  said  day  the  band  subscryved  be  Walter  Neilson  Georg  Lyoune  and 
Johne  Myllar  for  nyne  hundreth  punds  as  being  a  pairt  of  j^J  ll  that  was  awand 
be  ye  toune  with  the  od  hundreth  pund  thairof  is  put  in  ye  boxe  and  the 
collecto''  hes  receaved  three  scoir  pundis  of  anwal  rent  that  was  payable  be 
ye  toun  and  he  is  to  be  chargit  j^airw*. 

The  said  day  the  dekine  conveinar  pducit  fyfty  pundis  of  legacie  left  by 
vmq'i  Williame  Neilsone  his  father  to  this  hous  quhilk  is  distribut  as  folloues 
be  ye  dekines  and  yair  counsellors  viz  to  Williame  Dunca  xxx  li  and  to  Andro 
Finlay  xx  I1. 

The  said  day  forsameikle  as  it  is  maid  manifest  and  known  to  the  dekine 
conveinar  haill  dekins  and  thair  counsall  that  the  cowpers  spent  thair  wnlawis 
and  wther  goodis  of  ye  calling  ydllie  in  drinking  quhilkis  sould  be  bestowed 


1643]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  225 

on  the  poor  and  wther  pius  usuis  to  the  great  offence  of  God  hurt  and  pre- 
judice of  ye  poor,  thairfoir  the  dekine  conveinar  dekines  of  [?  and]  thair 
britherine  of  counsall  foirsaid  statutis  and  ordaines  that  nather  ye  dekine  of 
ye  cowpers  maisters  of  yat  craft  nor  na  wtheris  of  ye  sd  voca'unes  spend  any 
vnlawes  or  guidis  belonging  yairto  heirefter  bot  that  they  distribut  the  same 
to  ye  poor  and  wthers  pius  usus  of  ye  calling  and  to  ye  effect  that  it  may  be 
the  better  knowne  quhat  vnlavvis  and  wther  cawsualities  belongis  to  the  said 
craft  and  ar  exactit  and  collectit  heirefter  ordaines  the  dekine  pnt  and  to  cum 
zeirlie  to  mak  thair  compt  thairof  in  pns  of  ye  dekine  conveinar  and  remanent 
dekines  for  the  tyme  to  the  effect  it  may  be  knowne  that  the  foirsaidis  per- 
ticulars  ar  ryghtlie  bestowed. 

23   of  Maij   1643. 

The  said  day  Johne  Liddell  lawfull  sone  to  Robert  Liddell  in  Monygaf  Liddell 
is  buiked  heirin  prenteis  with  Jo'*  Kessen  weifer  to  serve  him  sevine  zeiris  as     °^y^^  ■ 
prenteis  and  two  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indento''  of  ye  dait 
of  yir  pntis. 

29  of  Maij  1643. 

The  said  day  the  dekine  conveinar  with  the  haill  dekins  of  craftis  (except  .'^dame. 
ye  dekines  of  the  cherurgians  and  masounes)  being  convenit  fyndis  that  Gawane 
Neisbit  hes  provine  the  perticularis  following  gevine  in  be  him  befoir  them  in 
bill  against  Patrik  Adame  pnt  dekine  of  the  tailzo''s  viz  that  the  said  Patrik 
contrair  the  actis  of  the  said  croft  at  his  awin  hand  without  consent  of  ye 
maisters  or  britherine  yairof  hes  lent  some  of  the  croftis  goods  and  that  the 
sd  Patrike  had  sold  ye  vnlawes  of  absence  from  buriells  to  Robert  Somervell 
whilk  sould  not  be  done  bot  be  exactit  for  ye  pooris  vse  Item  that  when  the 
calling  had  granted  some  supplie  to  poor  folkis  the  said  Patrik  maid  them  to 
spend  ane  great  pairt  thairof  befoir  they  could  get  it  from  him  Item  that 
the  said  Patrik  had  schamfuUie  vpbraided  the  said  Gawine  Neisbit  publictlie 
at  ane  melting  of  the  calling  and  thairfor  and  becaus  the  said  Patrik  in  pns 
of  the  said  dekine  conveinar  and  dekines  foirsd  pnt  did  call  the  said  Gawine 
ane  fals  calumiator  they  all  in  ane  voyce  ordanis  the  said  Patrik  to  goe  to  the 
tolbuith  and  to  remayne  yairine  during  yair  will  and  quhill  he  pay  fyve  pundis 
o(  vnlaw  to  ye  poor  and  give  satisfactioune  to  ye  sd  Gawine  at  yair  sight  and 
continowes  ye  rest  of  his  censour  vpon  his  good  beheavio''  and  cariage  to  ye 
nixt  melting. 

17  of  August  1643. 

The  sd  [day]  Johne  Mi^Ben  dekine  of   hamermane  Jo"  Stewart  dekine  of  Maskats. 
maissounes  Mathow  Colquhoime  dekine  of  wrygtis  produced  yair  muskettis 
and  bandeliers  conforme  to  ye  ordC  prescryvit  yairanent. 


226 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1643 


Adame. 


VVarrand 
Legal. 


The  said  day  the  dekine  conveinar  dekines  and  britherine  of  y''  counsall 
wha  for  ye  maist  pairt  was  pnt  ordanis  Patrik  Adame  pnt  dekine  of  ye  tailzCs 
to  pay  fyve  pundis  of  \'Tilaw  for  ye  vse  of  ye  poor  qlk  he  was  ordanit  to  pay 
conforme  to  ye  act  of  ye  dait  ye  twentie  nyne  of  Maij  last  and  in  respect  of  ye 
perticularis  contenit  yairintill  and  of  ye  sd  Patrik  his  ruid  cariage  befoir  them 
this  day  and  for  yat  he  had  called  ye  witness  wha  deponit  v''intill  mensworne 
thev  thairfoir  all  in  ane  voyce  be  ye  teno''  heirof  statutis  and  ordanis  that  the 
sd  Patrik  sail  never  beir  office  among  ye  craftis  heirefter  quhill  he  mak  full 
satisfactioune  to  ye  dekine  conveinar  and  heall  dekines  of  craftis  and  thair 
britherine  of  counsall  for  ye  tyme    for  ye  foirsdis  wTOungis. 

The  sd  day  ordaines  ye  collector  to  pay  of  prenteis  fie  with  Johne  Legait 
sone  to  vmq"  Jo°  Legait  cordoner  twentie  markis. 


Prenteis 
Lwninff. 


28  of  August  1643. 

The  said  day  Thomas  Lwning  sone  lawfull  to  Thomas  Lining  maltmane 
is  bulked  heirin  prenteis  w'  Jaes  Broun  litster  during  ye  space  of  sevine  zeirs 
conforme  to  ye  indentC  of  ye  dait  ye  22  day  of  Marche  1642  zeirs. 


Vndecimo  Octobris  1643. 

The  quhilk  day  the  dekine  conveinar  with  the  dekines  of  craftis  and  thair 
bretherine  of  counsall  being  convenit  (wha  for  the  maist  pairt  war  pnt)  for 
the  electing  of  three  persounes  of  thair  number  to  be  pntit  to  the  provest 
baillies  and  counsall  of  this  bru'  and  wthers  havand  enteres  to  the  effect  that 
ane  of  them  may  be  electit  and  chosine  to  beir  office  as  dekine  conveinar  of 
this  bru'  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  be  plurati  of  voittis  thir  persounes  following  viz 
Manasses  Lyill  Niniane  Gilhagie  and  Walter  Neilsoun  [are  elected]  to  be 
presentit  to  the  saidis  provest  baillies  and  counsall  and  wthers  foirsd  to  the 
effect  abovewryttine  and  ordaines  the  said  lyt  to  be  pntit  be  Johne  Andersoune 
lait  baillie. 

Lykas  the  same  day  the  foirsaid  Manasses  Lyill  being  electit  dekine 
conveinar  he  maid  choys  of  the  psounes  following  to  be  on  his  counsall  for  ane 
zeir  to  cum. 


Williame  Birrell 
Roliert  Hoggisyaird 
Robert  Boyd 
Michaell  Likprivik 
Johne  Bochannane 
Johne  Baird 


Georg  Lochheid 
Johne  Boyd 
Robert  Reid 
Georg  Mitchelsoune 
James  Moresoune 
Robert  Cochrane 
W™  Goveane 
Ro*  Hutchesoune 


1643]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 

Gavine  Neisbit  baillie 


227 


Johne  M<=Ben 
Adame  Nicoll 
Robert  Wilsoun 
Daniell  Inglis 
James  Duncane 

Johne  Andersoun 
Richard  Allane 
Johne  Wilsoun 
Williame  Coatis 
Adame  Wilsoun 


Georg  Lyoun 
Robert  Pollok  elder 

Johne  Stewart  zounger 

James  Colquhoune 
Mathow  Colquhoun 

Mr  James  Hamiltoun 


Walter  Dowglas 
Williame  Neilsoun 
Niniane  Gilhagie 
Walter  Neilsoun 
Johne  Gilhagie 


Robert  Finnie 
Alex'  Colquhoun 

David  Robesoun 
Georg  Muir 


Thomas  Hutchesoun 
Williame  Howie 


Robert  Horner 
Peter  Johnstoun 
James  Ogilvie 
Johne  Clark 
Jannes  Stirling 

Williame  Huntar 
James  Padie 

Thomas  Scot 
Johne  Scot 

Johne  Falconer 
Patrik  Clark 
Johne  Patersoun 

Duodecimo  Odobris  1643. 

The  said  day  the  dekine  conveinar  with  the  dekines  of  craftis  and  yair 
counsall  above  wryttine  being  convenit  (wha  for  the  maist  pairt  war  pnt) 
for  the  electing  four  of  thair  nuber  to  be  on  the  deane  of  gildis  counsall  for  ane 
zeir  to  come  be  pluraltie  of  voits  thir  persounes  following  viz  Johne  Andersoun 
lait  baillie  W™  Neilsoune  Richard  Allane  and  Robert  Hogiszaird  ar  electit 
to  be  on  the  deane  of  gildis  counsall  for  ane  zeir  to  come. 

Vigesimo  Odobris  1643. 

The  said  day  the  dekine  conveinar  with  the  haill  dekines  of  craftis  and  Lyoune 
hair  britherine  of  counsall  being  convenit  wha  for  the  maist  pau-t  war  pnt 


228 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1643 


be  pluralitie  of  voittis  Georg  Lyoune  cowper  is  electit  thair  collecto''  for  the 
zeir  to  cume  quha  being  pnt  acceptit  the  said  office  in  and  vpon  him  and  hes 
givin  his  aithe  as  vse  is. 

The  said  day  Johne  Wallace  lait  collector  maid  his  compt  of  his  intro- 
missioune  with  the  hospitalls  goodis  fra  his  last  electioun  to  this  tyme  quhairof 
chairg  and  dischairg  followes. 


Chairg. 

In  the  first  thair  was  restand  in  his  hand  at  the  making  of  his  last  compt 

ji^xxxij  tl  XV  s. 

Macolme  Item  receaved  be  him  fra  Macolme  Crawfuird  for  the  anwell  of  v<=  marks  awand 

Crawfurd.  ^^  j^j^  band  fra  Mertimes  1641  to  Mertimes  1642         xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Neisbit.  Item  fra  Gawine  Neisbit  for  the  anuell  of  v''  pundis  the  said  zeir  xl  tl 

PoUok.  Item  fra  Charles  Pollok  for  the  anwell  of  twa  hundreth  pundis  awand  be  band 

fra  Witsounday  1641  to  Witsounday  1643     .  .  .         xxxij  li 

Campbell.  Item  fra  M''  Niniane  Campbell  for  the  anuell  of  ane  hundreth  punds  fra  Wit- 
sounday 1641  zeiris  to  Mtimes  1642     .  .  .  .  xij  ll 

Scheillis.  Item  fra  James  Scheillis  for  the  anwell  of  ane  hundreth  markis  awand  be  band 

fra  Mertimes  1641  to  Mtimes  1643      .  .  .        v  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Lyill.  Item  fra  Androw  Lyill  for  the  anwell  of  fourtie  pundis  fra  Mtimes  1642  to 

Mertimes  1643  .  .  .  .  .  iij  li  iiij  s. 

TourgiU.  Item  fra  Robert  Boyd  of  Tourgill  for  the  anwell  of  ane  thousand  mkis  awand 

be  band  fra  Mtimes  1641  to  Mtimes  1642        .  .      Iiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Fouiiartoun.  Item  fra  the  relict  of  vmq"  M''  James  Foullartoun  for  the  iinwall  of  fyve 
hundreth  markis  fra  Mtimes  164 1  to  Witsounday  1642  at  quhilk  tyme 
the  said  prin"  sowme  was  payit  .  .  .  .  xl  li 

Noblestoun.  Item  fra  Williame  Weyms  as  cau''  for  the  vmq"  good  man  of  Noblstoun  for 
the  anwell  of  twa  hundreth  markis  fra  Witsounday  1640  to  Mertimes  1642 

xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Nobilisferme.  Item  fra  the  Laird  of  Noblsferme  for  the  anwall  of  fyve  hundreth  mks  awand 
be  band  fra  Mtimes  1641  to  Mtimes  1642        .  xxxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiijd. 

Kiiersiie.  Item  fra  the  Laird  of  Ellerslie  for  the  anwell  of  fyve  hundreth  mkis  fra  Wit- 

sounday 1640  to  Mertimes  1642  .  .  Ixvj  "ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

.Vciamtoun.  Item  fra  James  Blair  of  Adamtoun  for  the  anwall  of  twa  hundreth  markis  fra 
Mertimes  1641  to  Mtimes  1642  .  .  .       x  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Boyd.  Item  fra  David  Boyd  for  the  anwell  of  ane  thowsand  markis  money  fra  Wit- 

sounday 1642  to  Witsounday  1643      .  .  .     Iiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Smythe.  Item  fra  James  Smythe  for  the  anwal  of  fyve  hundreth  mkis  the  said  zeir 

xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Finlay.  Item  fra  Robert  Finlay  for  the  anwel  of  ane  hundreth  pundis  fra  Mtimes  1641 

to  Witsounday  1643    .  .  .  .  .  .  xij  ll 


1643]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  229 

Item  fra  James  Cleland  for  the  anwcll  of  twa  hundreth  jumds  fia  Hallowmes  cieland. 

1642  to  Candlmes  1643  .  .  .  •  •  i'ij  li 

Item  fra  the  toun  of  Glasgow  for  the  anvcll  of  ane  thowsand  pundis  three  Glasgow. 

qrters  .  .  .  .  •  •  1^  li 

Item  fra  the  exeo^s  of  vmq"  Archibald  Fauldis  of  legacie    .  .  xx  1i  Legade 

^  °  ■   .-      ■■  ^     Faullis. 

Item  for  the  mort  clathes                .              .              .  •  v]  li  vi]  s. 

Item  fra  Arthor  Tackets  restand  of  his  gildrie  fyne  xiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  of  quarter  comptis     .              .              .              .  .  .          ii<^vj  ll 

Item  for  certane  small  tumors  that  war  sold  be  weght  .  .              Iv  s. 

Suina  ....    viijclxxix  li  xvij  s.  viij  d. 


DiscJiairge. 

In  the  first  debursed  to  Williame  Calderwood  pairtlie  for  his  supplie  and 
pairtlie  for  his  clathes  and  coat  and  making  of  them     xxviij  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  the  colledge  collector  for  ane  half  zeiris  dewtie  of  the  bursar 

xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  certane  poor  persounes  at  the  Hallowmas  court       Ixiij  li  iij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  ane  kist  and  wining  scheit  to  Georg  Schirilaw     iiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  for  wasching  of  his  claithes   .  .  .  .  ■  xij  s. 

Item  to  Andro  Lyill  for  making  of  ye  poor  folkes  claithes  the  haill  zeir 

vij  li  XV  s. 

Item  to  Thomas  Naismaith  bonatmaker  for  his  supplie       xiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  for  mending  the  moirt  claith  and  furneisching  buckacie  thairto     xxiij  s. 

Item  for  stenting  of  the  pallioun    .....  viij  s. 

Item  for  strae  to  the  poor  mens  beds         ....       xxvnj  s. 

Item  to  Johne  Mairschell  in  compleit  payment  of  fyftie  pundis  was  payed  to 
him  be  the  hous  in  name  of  Johne  Naper  in  respects  they  stand  infeft  in 
his  lands  in  securitie  yof  .  .  .  .  .  x  ll 

Item  to  certane  poor  persounes  at  Candlemas  court       .        •  xxxvj  ll  xv  s. 

Item  to  William  Duncanes  wyf  for  hir  supplie       .  .         v  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  for  ane  riddell  to  the  hows    .  .  .  .  •  vj  s. 

Item  to  James  Watsoun  flescho""  for  his  supplie     .  .     vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  for  schoes  to  the  poor  in  the  hous  the  haill  zeir         .  .  viij  ll 

Item  for  cloathe  to  be  cloathes  to  James  Muir       .  .  .  x  ll 

Item  for  oyll  to  dres  the  muskats  .  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Item  to  the  dark  for  his  fiall  .  .  .  -  •  xx  ll 

Item  to  him  for  vvrytting  of  fourtein  copies  of  the  kingis  Ire     .  liiij  s. 

Item  for  ane  buckie  to  the  hows    .....  iiij  s. 

Item  at  Belten  court  to  certane  poor  persounes  for  thair  supplie 

xxxix  tl  xiiij  s. 

Item  to  them  at  Lamas  court        .  .  .  .  Ij  li  viij  d. 


230  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1643 

Item  to  Johne  Legat  soune  to  Johne  Legat  cordoner  to  help  to  pay  his  prenteis 
fie       .  .  .  .  .  .  .    xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  spent  in  Johne  Bells  hows  for  the  causs  knovvne  to  the  hows     xvij  ll  xix  s. 

Item  for  helping  to  cut  ane  poor  boy  of  the  staine  .  .    v  ll  viij  s. 

Item  for  laying  of  Coleine  Campbells  daills  .  .  .  iij  ll 

Item  to  Gawin  Leis  for  his  supplie  by  his  dewis    .  .  .  liij  s. 

Item  to  ane  distrest  honest  man  com  from  Irland  .  .    v  ll  viij  s. 

Item  for  coalls  and  peits  to  the  hows         .  .  .  xxvij  ll  xj  s. 

Item  for  sowping  of  the  lumheid    .....  iiij  s. 

Item  to  the  four  penschiouners  viz  James  Muir  James  Scheills  Johne  Pollok 
and  Williame  Houstoun  ....      liij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  the  sex  poor  men  in  the  hows       ....  ij^^xl  ll 

Suiiia  of  the  discharg  is  .  .         vij^xiiij  ll  xiiij  s.  viij  d. 

Swa    chairg    and    dischairg    being    calculat    the  compter   rests 

awand  in               .....  j'lxv  i.  iij  s. 

Quhairof  he  hes  gottin  for  his  paines        .              .  .               x  ll 

Swa  rests               .              .              .              .              .  j^lv  ll  iij  s. 

Compt  rentall.  The  said  day  Williame  Raid  officer  maid  conipt  of  the  small  anwall  con- 

teined  in  the  rentall  in  the  quhilk  thair  is  iiij  s.  vj  d.  gottine  for  ane  aiker  of 
land  m  Dowhill  that  was  out  of  vse  of  payment  and  the  haill  extends  to  fyftie 
sax  pund  viij  s.  viij  d.  quhairof  he  hes  gottine  for  his  awin  paines  v  ll  viij  s. 
Swa  rests  Ij  ll  viij  d. 

Memorand«»i.  The  said  day  Thomas  Scot  payed  in  for  Johne  Bochanan  for  the  small 

dews  was  gottin  from  the  burgess  and  gildbroy  (by  and  attof  sevintein  bands 
conteining  three  scoir  punds  tlie  peice  that  was  gottin  fra  gildbrither)  fourtie 
aught  punds  xvj  s.  viij  d.  and  thair  is  awand  be  Quentein  Rankeine  fyfteine 
pund. 

Memorand. 

MemorandMMi.  Thair  is  two  of  the  said  sevinteine  band  viz  Johne  Myllars    and    \\"' 

Johnstounes  ar  givin  to  the  collecto"'  becaus  the  tmes  of  payment  yof  is  bypast 
and  he  is  to  be  chargt  yairwith  and  with  the  fyftein  punds  awand  be  Quentein 
Rankeine  and  fyfteine  of  the  saids  bands  ar  put  in  ye  box. 

MemorandMm.  Noia  the  haill  moneyis  that   Johne  Wallace   last   collecto"'  was  awand 

conforme  to  his  compt  was  payit  in  be  him  qlk  with  the  money  produced  be 
Thomas  Scot  and  the  money  that  was  in  the  box  and  that  whilk  was  givin  in 
be  William  Reid  extends  all  in  haill  to  four  hundreth  aught  pund. 


i644]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  231 

Notu  the  fyve  hundreth  markis  that  was  awand  be  M"^  James  FuUartoun  Memoraadum. 
was  payed  in  at  Witsounday  last  and  lent  out  to  Johne  M^'Lachlane  of  Inner- 
neill  and  Archibald  MCleane  no{  and  the  band  put  in  the  box. 

The  said  day  the  dckine  conveinar  with  the  dekins  of  craft  and  thair  Naraoneyis 
britherine  of  counsell  taking  to  thair  considera^une  the  great  loss  and  detrement    °,^^i ''" 
susteaned  be  thair   hospitall   and  members  yairof  throw  lending  of  money  cawtioun. 
heirtofoir  to  severall  persounes  vpon  band  w'out  caution  for  remead  quhairof 
in  tyme  cuming  it  is  statut  and  ordanit  as  they  be  the  tennor  heirof  statutis 
and  ordaines  that  na  sovvmes  of  money  belonging  to  thair  said  hospitall  be 
lent  to  ony  maner  of  persoune  ather  poor  or  ritche  without  band  and  sufficient 
cawtioune  and  the  voters  yairof  and  lenders  yairof  if  ony  sail  be  heireft  to  be 
lyable  in  payment  of  all  such  sowmes  of  money  as  sail  be  lent  or  consentit 
be  them  to  be  lent  without  cawtioun  as  said  is. 

The  said  day  it  is  ordainit  that  ilk  poor  man  in  the  hows  receave  quarterlie  Augment- 

.  !,■  1-  a/<ouu  poor. 

heirefter  twelf  pundis  money. 

Nota  twa  of  the  sevintein  bandis  gottin  from  gildbroy  viz  Johne  Myllar  Memorandum 
for  three  scoir  punds  and  Williame  Johnsoune  of  three  scoir  pund  ar  bath  ''^°'^'=- 
delyvered  to  the  collector  and  he  is  to  be  chargit  yairwt  at  the  making  of  his 
compt  and  w'  fyftein  punds  awin  be  Quentein  Rankein. 

xvij  of  No''  1643. 
The  said  day  the  dark  and  officer  ar  both  continoued. 

xiiij  of  December  1643. 

The  said  day  James  Muir  lawful!  broy  germane  to  John  Muir  in  Gorballs  Preuteis  Muir. 
is  bulked  heirin  as  prenteis  with  James  Scot  cordoner  burges  of  this  brughe 
to  serve  him  seavine  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme 
to  the  indentor  of  the  dait  the  xxvj  day  of  Julie  last. 

xxvj  of  December  1643. 

The  said  day  John  Philpshill  sone  law"  to  Gawin  Philpshill  in  Kilbryd  Prcnteis 
is  buiked  heirin  as  prenteis  with  Michael  Likprivik  skynnar  to  serve  him  sevin  I'li'lp^hui. 
zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indcntu"^  daitit 
the  last  day  of  Maij  1643  zeirs. 

Prima  Februarij  1644. 

The  said  day  the  dekine  conveinar  dekines  of  craftis  and  thair  britherine  Zoung. 
of  counsall  being  convenit  gave  thair  full  assent  and  consentis  to  the  adniissioun 
of  M'  Georg  Zoung  to  be  admittit  ane  of  the  ordinar  maisters  of  this  brughe. 


232 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1644 


New  box. 


Quinto  Februarij  1644. 

The  said  day  thaii-  is  ane  new  box  produced  having  three  outter  lockis 
and  ane  inner  lock  quhairof  the  inner  kie  is  gevin  to  the  dekine  of  the  hamer- 
mane  and  the  kies  of  the  outter  lockis  ar  givin  to  the  dekines  of  the  tailzoi's 
and  cordoners  and  visitor  of  the  maltmen  and  the  three  kies  of  the  old  box 
at  put  in  the  new  box. 

The  said  day  ordaines  ane  warrand  to  be  givin  to  ye  collectour  for  the 
sowme  of  ten  pundis  he  gave  to  vmq'"  Williame  Ritchie  befor  his  deceis  at 
cQmand  of  the  dekine  conveinar  and  wyr  honest  men. 

Wrang  Algeo.  The  Said  day  the  dekines  ordaines  Williame  Algeo  to  goe  to  fast  ward 

quhOl  he  give  satisfactioun  to  the  dekine  conveinar  for  calumniating  of  him 
and  wranging  him  on  ye  hie  streit  in  his  face  and  to  pay  fyve  pundis  money 
to  the  poor. 


Warrand. 


Warrand. 


Currie. 


.•^ct  against 
Finlav. 


Bajids  takin 
out. 


Warrand. 


The  said  day  ordaines  ye  collectotu"  to  pay  to  David  Muir  twelf  pundis 
money  for  four  lockis  to  the  new  box. 

Septimo  Maij  1644. 

The  said  day  Johne  Currie  tailzo''  is  be  pluralitie  of  voitis  placed  in  the 
hospitall  to  supplie  the  vacand  place  y""  and  ordaines  him  to  gett  his  payment 
quarterlie  conforme  as  ye  rest. 

The  said  day  the  dekine  conveinar  dekines  of  craftis  and  yair  britherine 
of  counsall  being  convenit  and  having  takine  to  thair  considera^unes  how  that 
Robert  Fmlay  cordoner  had  at  the  last  melting  misregairded  and  vilipendit 
this  place  in  that  he  refuissit  to  declair  his  voyce  and  opinioun  their  being 
requyreit  anent  M''  Hew  Blair  his  admissioun  to  the  ministrie  within  this 
brughe  and  thairfoir  they  all  in  ane  vojxe  ordaines  his  name  to  be  deleit  out 
of  ye  roll  and  ordaines  him  never  to  bruik  office  ather  as  qrter  maister  or 
dekine  of  his  craft  or  as  counsello""  to  yis  place  whill  he  give  satisfactioun  to 
this  place  for  his  offence. 

The  said  ilay  Tourgills  band  and  Robert  Finlayis  band  ar  takin  out  and 
ar  m  the  clarkis  handis. 

Nono  Maij  1644. 

The  said  day  the  dekins  ordaines  thair  collectour  to  pay  the  sowmes 
following  to  the  persounes  efterspeit  for  thair  help  and  supplie  viz  to  Androw 
Finlay  skynnar  xij  ll  to  (  )  Smyth  cowper  xl  s.   and  to  Helein 

Bogle  aught  markis  money  for  attending  vpon  Johne  Wyllie  ane  of  the  poor 
men  in  the  hows  the  tyme  of  his  seknes. 


i644l       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  233 

Decimo   Sepiimo    Maij   1644. 

The  said  day  James  Ritchie  in  Castillachlane  is  buikit  hciriii  prenteis  Prenteis 
with  Johne  Maxvell  skynnar  to  serve  him  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit 
and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentof  of  the  dait  of  yir  pntis. 

Vigesimo  Junij  1644. 

The  said  day  Georg  Parke  sone  lawfull  to  vrnq"  Patrik  Parke  in  Gairbraid  Prenteis 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  James  Smythe  elder  hamerman  to  serve  him  as     "  ^' 
prenteis  and  servand  duiring  the  space  of  seavine  zeirs  conform  to  the  indentour 
of  the  dait  the  fyft  day  of  October  last. 

Vndecimo  Augustj  1644. 

The  said  day  fyve  hundrethe  markis  that  was  awand  be  Johne  M^^Lachlane  Money  lent 
of  Innerneill  as  prin"  Robert  Bovd  tailzor  and  wthers  his  cautioners  is  payit  <^o"«^<=to'. 
and  lent  out  againe  and  the  collectour  hes  gottine  xx  li  for  three  quarters 
anwa!  rent  thairof  for  the  quhilk  he  is  to  be  chargit  at  his  compt. 

Tertio  Septembris  1644. 

The  said  day  Walter  Neilsoune  and  Johne  Myllar  producit  ane  band 
granted  be  Robert  Sympsoune  and  his  cau^is  conteaning  the  sowme  of  fyve 
hundrethe  markis  and  payit  in  four  hundrethe  markis  in  money  quhilk  com- 
pleitis  thair  two  pairtis  of  the  nyne  hundreth  pund  that  was  awand  be  them 
and  Georg  Lyoune  and  the  said  Geoig  is  to  give  in  band  for  three  hundreth 
punds  money  quhilk  compleitis  that  nync  hundrethe  pundis  money  and  the 
collecto''  Georg  Lyoune  is  to  be  chargit  at  his  compt  making  for  the  anwal 
rent  of  the  haill  nyne  hundreth  pund  for  ane  zeir  and  ane  qrter  extending  to 
Ixxxx  li  and  the  said  Robert  Sympsons  band  with  the  foirsaid  four  hundrethe 
markis  of  money  ar  put  in  the  box. 

The  said  day  the  foirsaid  I^and  ix<^  tl  is  takin  out  of  ye  box  and  to  be  keiped  Band  takin 
vp  whill  Georg  Lyoun  subscryve  ane  band  for  iij'=  ll  and  the  collecto''  is  gottin 
Johne  Boyds  band  of  Ix  tl  and  he  is  to  be  chargit  yairwith  at  the  making  of 
his  compt. 

The  said    day  the  dekine  conveinar  delyvered  to  the  collectour  twentie  Collecto'. 
fyve  pundis  for  the  proffeit  of  the  first  daills  com  in  this  last  zeir  and  xxx  ll 
for  the  proffeit  of  the  last  daills  and  he  is  to  be  chargit  yairwith  at  the  making 
of  his  compt. 

The  said  day  the  dekines  of  the  tailzo's  of  the  weifers  of  the  chirurgians  Musquets. 
hamermane  skynnars  and  visito''  of  ye  maltmane  gave  in  yair  musquetis  and  P'^°'i"<^^'^- 
bandeliers  whilkis  ar  to  be  hung  vp  with  the  rest. 


234  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1644 

The  said  day  the  dark  producit  againe  Robert  Finlayis  band  and  is  put 
in  the  box  and  Tourgills  band  is  regrat. 

Quinto  Septemhris  1644. 
Prenteis  The  Said  day  Davnd  Boyd  sone  natural!  to  Robert  Boyd  taUzour  is  bulked 

^°^''^'  helrin  prenteis  with  his  sd  father  to  serve  him  seavln  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa 

zeiris  for  melt  and  fie  conforme  to  his  indentof  of  the  dalt  ye  sext  day  of  August 
1641. 

Noiio  Odobris  1644. 
The  said  day  Manasses  Lyill  deklne  conveinar  with  the  deklns  of  craftis 
and  thair  bretherine  of  counsall  being  conveinit  for  electing  of  twa  of  thair 
number  to  be  presentit  with  the  said  Manasses  to  the  provest  baillles  and 
counsall  of  this  bru'  to  the  effect  ane  of  them  might  be  electit  dekine  con- 
veinar for  the  zeir  to  cum  they  maid  choyse  of  Ga\-in  Neisbit  and  \\'alter 
Neilsone  to  the  effect  foirsaid  and  ordaines  the  same  to  be  presentit  be  Ro' 
Horner. 

The  said  day  the  said  Manasses  Lyill  being  continowed  dekine  conveinar 
for  the  zeir  to  cum  he  with  the  dekins  maid  choys  of  thair  counsall  as  followes. 

Adame  Nicoll  Johne  Stewart  elder 

Henrie  Merschell  Mathow  Colquhoune 

Robert  Horner  Georg  Mitchelsone 

Johne  Auldcorne  Walter  NeOsone 

Thomas  Scott  David  Boyd 

Patrik  Clark  Patrik  Brounsyd 

Cuthbert  Grege  Johne  Widdrow 

\\'illiame  Neilsone  baUlie 
Johne  Wilsoune  water  baillie 

William  Birrell  Georg  Lochhead 

Henrie  Robesone  Robert  Merschell 

Robert  Wilsone 

Daniell  Inglis  Johne  Boyd 

James  Duncane 

Robert  Reid 

James  Colquhoune 
Robert  Hogiszaird 

Johne  Andersone  Walter  Dowglas 

Richard  Allane  Niniane  Gilhagie 

Johne  Wilsone  elder  James  Moresone 

William  Coattis  Williame  Lytbodie 

Johne  Wallace 


1644]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  235 

Gavvin  Neisbit  Robert  Cochrane 

Robert  Boyd  Alex''  Colquhoune 
Peter  Johnesone 

James  Ogilvie  Williame  Goveane 

Johne  Myllar  George  Muir 

Thomas  Atchesone 
Michaell  Lickprivik  Thomas  Hutchesone 

Johne  Bar 

Johne  Bochanane 
Johne  Scott 

Johne  Baird 
Johne  Falconer 
Johne  Patersone 

Decinio  Octobris  1644. 
The  haill  foirsdis  persounes  being  warnit  and  this  day  conveinit  for  the  Four  men  on 
maist  pairt  they  did  elect  the   four  persounes  following  viz  Gawin  Neisbit  gUds 'counsail. 
Johne  Andersone  Niniane  Gilhagie  and  Walter  Neilsone  to  sit  on  the  deane  of 
gild  his  counsail  for  the  zeir  to  cum  as  four  of  the  craftis  choysine  conforme 
to  the  act  of  gildrie. 

The  same  daj'  it  is  statut  and  ordanit  that  whoever  beis  electit  water 
baillie  being  ane  craftismane  sail  be  ane  ordinar  counsello''  to  the  dekine 
conveinar. 

xviij  of  October  1644. 

The  said  day  George  Lyoun  lait  collector  maid  his  compt  anent  his  intro- 
missioune  with  the  hous  rentis. 

In  the  first  fra  Niniane  Patersone  in  name  of  David  Colquhoune  for  the  anwal  Colquhoun. 

rent  of  fyve  hundreth  niarkis  fra  Mertimas  1641  to  Mertimas  1643 

liij  ti  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  receavit  fra  Johne  Mi^Lachlane  for  the  anwal  rent  of  fyve  hundrethe  M'Lachlane. 

markis  three  quarters  of  ane  zeir         .  .  .  .  xx  ti 

Item  receavit  fra  the  Laird  of  Nobleferme  for  the  anwal  rent  of  fyve  hundrethe  Nobleferme. 

markis  fra  Mertimes  1642  to  Mtimes  1643       .  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  James  Blair  of  Adamtoun  for  the  anwal  rent  of  twa  hundrethe  markis  Blair. 

the  said  zeir    .  .  .  .  .  .       x  ti  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  David  Boyd  for  the  anwell  of  ane  thowsand  markis  the  tme  of  Mtimes  Boyd. 

1643  and  Witsonday  1644       .  .  .  liij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 


236 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1644 


Sraythe. 

Finlay. 

CoUecto'  and 
wy'is- 

ScheiUis. 

Campbell. 

Quarter 
compts. 
GUdrie  fyne. 
Gildrie  fyne. 
Gildrie  fyne. 
Gildrie  fyne. 


Coiiimoun 
vento'. 


N'eisbit. 
Pollok. 


Item  fra  James  Smythe  for  the  anwal  rent  of  fyve  hundrethe  marks  the  zeir 

foirsd  .....  xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  Robert  Finlay  for  the  anwal  rent  of  ane  hundreth  pund  for  the  tme 

of  Mertimes  1643  and  Witsounday  1644  .  .  .  viij  13 

Item  fra  \\' alter  Neilsone  Johne  Miller  and  the  compter  himself  for  the  anwal 

rent  ix''  punds  ane  zeir  and  ane  quarter  .  .  .       Ixxxx  Ti 

Item  fra  James  Scheills  for  the  arent  of  j^  markis  fra  Mtinies  1642  to  Mtimes 

1643    .  .  .  .  .  .  .        V  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  M''  Niniane  Campbell  for  the  anwal  rent  of  jc  l  fra  Mertimes  1642  to 

Mertimes  1643  ......  viij  ti 

Item  receavit  fra  the  dekines  of  quarter  compts    .  .  .  ij<^ix  ll 

Item  fra  Quentein  Rankein  for  his  gildrie  fyne         .  .  .  xv  I1 

Item  receavit  fra  Williame  Johnstoun  for  his  gildrie  fynne  .  .  [  Ix  tl 

Item  receavit  fra  Johne  Myllar  for  his  gildrie  fynne  .  .  Ix  ll 

Item  receavit  fra  Johne  Boyd  for  his  gildrie  f\nne  .  .  Ix  ll 

Item  receavit  fra  the  dekine  conveinar  for  the  proffeit  of  the  daills  com  in  first 

this  last  zeir    .......  xxv  ll 

Mair  receavit  be  him  for  the  proffeit  of  the  ventar  daills  and  tar  com  in  last 

XXX  ti 

Item  receaved  be  the  compter  out  of  the  box         .  .  .  Ixxx  ll 

Item  receavit  fra  Gawin  Neisbit  for  the  anwall  of  v^  pund  fra  Mertimes  1642 

to  Mertimes  1643         .  .  .  .  •  .  xl  li 

Ite  fra  Charles  Pollok  for  the  anwell  of  three  hundrethe  marks  for  the  tme  of 

Mertimes  1643  and  Witsounday  1644  .  .  .  xvj  ll 

Ite  for  the  mortclothis       ......       xxxvj  s. 


Followes  the  compteris  discharge. 


In  the  first  givin  to  Williame  Calderwood  to  by  schoone    .  .  iij  ll 

Item  to  Aiidrow  Lyill  for  the  making  of  sex  stand  of  clothes  to  the  poore  mene 

in  the  hows  and  ane  cloak  and  some  furnisching  confornie  to  his  compt 

viij  ll  xviij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  to  vmq"  Williame  Ritchie  conforme  to  the  warrand.  .  x  ll 

Item  for  42  ells  and  ane  half  of  gainhecklines  at  vij  s.  viij  d.  the  ell  to  be  sarkis 

to  ye  poor  men  is        .  .  .  .  .      xv  ll  iij  s.   iiij  d. 

Item  to  David  Muir  for  four  locks  to  ye  new  box  .  .  xij  ll 

Item  to  Johne  Dickie  for  the  said  new  box  .  .        v  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  for  ane  chist  and  ane  wining  scheit  to  vniqi'  Johne  Wyllie         iiij  ll  vj  s. 
Item  for  lyme  and  sand  to  the  hous  ....  xlij  s. 

Item  to  Gilbert  Maxvell  for  poynting  of  the  hows  furneisching  sklait  fog  and 
naills  yairto  ......  iiij  li 

Item  to  the  dark  for  the  wTitting  of  two  dispositiounes  and  transumpting  of 

two  seasingis  .  .  .  .  •  .       v  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 


1644]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  237 

Item  sex  pair  of  schoone  to  the  poor  men  .  .  .  ix  tl 

Item  for  regrating  of  Tourgills  band  and  raising  horning  yairvpon 

iiij  ll  iiij  s. 
Item  for  two  pair  of  scheitis  to  the  hous   .  .  .  v  ll  xij  s. 

Item  to  the  four  pensiouneris         .  .  .  Iiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  givin  at  comand  of  the  dekine  conveinar  to  Elspethe  Bogill        liiij  s. 
Mair  givin  at  his  comand  to  (  )  Broun  .  .        xxiiij  s. 

M  givin  at  his  comand  to  helpe  to  cut  ane  bairne  of  Mareon  Pryds  of  the  staine 

V  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  debursed  at  severall  tymes  for  coalls  to  the  hows         xxij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  for  strae  and  peits     ......     xxxviij  s. 

Item  debursit  to  the  sex  poor  men  in  the  hows  to  ilk  ane  of  them  in  the  quarter 

twelf  tl  is         .  .  .  .  .  .  ij<=lxxxviij  ll 

Item  debursit  to  divers  poor  people  at  Hallowmes  court  1643  conforme  to  the 

warrand  ......  Iiij  li  x  s. 

Item  givin  to  Allane  Smythe  .  .  .  .  .  xx  s. 

Item  debursit  to  divers  poor  people  at  Candlemas  court  1644  conform  to  ye 

warrand  ......  xlij  li  xiiij  s. 

M""  to  divers  poor  people  at  Belten  court  1644  conforme  to  ye  warrand 

xlviij  ll  viij  s.  viij  d. 
Item  debursit  to  divers  poor  ]Wople  at  Lammas  court  1644  conforme  to  ye 

warrand  .....  xliiij  ll   xvj  s.    iiij  d. 

Item  to  the  dark  for  his  fie  .  .  .  .  .  xx  ll 

Item  debursit  to  Gawin  Neisbit  for  29  ells  and  ane  half  of  coullourit  clothe  to 

be  clothes  to  yc  poor  men  in  the  hows  at  38s.  the  ell  is  .     Ivj  li  j  s. 

M  to  him  for  30  ells  of  norlanc  tweill  to  lyne  the  saids  clothes  at  vij  s.  the  ell 

is         •  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       X  li  X  s. 

Item  givin  to  Andrew  Finlay  Allane  Smyth  and  Helein  Bogle  conform  to  the 

warrand  .  .  .  .  .  .    xix  ti  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Suitia  of  the  haill  discharge  is  .  vij<^lix  ll  viij  s.  iiij  d. 

And  so  chairge  and  dischairg  being  calculat  the  compter  rests  in 
and  hes  payit       ....  j'xxxviij  ll  7s.  8d. 


The  said  day  Robert  Hogszaird  producit  the  moneys  wes  gottin  in  the 
last  zeir  fra  the  burgess  and  gildbrither  twenty  four  pund  nyntein  schilling 
four  pennies  and  William  Keid  consignit  the  small  dewties  conteined  in  the 
rentell  extending  to  fiftie  sex  pund  sex  schilling  viij  d.  and  he  got  bak  for  his 
paines  eight  inks  and  swa  the  haill  money  in  ye  box  including  yairin  that 
money  gottin  from  William  Reid  and  Robert  Hogiszaird  extends  to  ane 
thowsand  markis  mone\'. 


238 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1644 


Love. 

Crawfurd. 

Neisbit. 

Boyd. 

PoUok. 

Campbell. 

Scheillis. 

Lyill. 

Colquhoun. 

Tourgill. 

Nobilstoun. 

Nobleferme. 

EUerslie. 

Adamtoun. 
Boyd. 
Smythe. 
Finlay. 


FoUowes  the  catolloge  of  the  hands  belonging  to  the  crafiis  hospital  xii'-in 

the  brnghe  of  Glasgow. 

In  the  first  awand  be  Johne  Love  and  his  cautioners  twa  hundrethe  markis 

money  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  1644  with  eight  zeirs  arent. 
Item  be  Macohne  Crawfuird  of  Cartisburne  and  his  cauris  fyve  hundrethe 

markis  money  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  1644  with  twa  zeiris  anwal  rent. 
Item  be  Gawin  Neisbit  fyve  hundreth  punds  money  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes 

1644  w'  ane  zeirs  arent. 
Item  be  Sir  Thomas  Boyd  as  prin"  the  Laird  of  Montgreinane  and  (  ) 

Wallace  of  Faill  his  caul's  twa  hundreth  jurnds  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes 

1644  with  four  zeirs  anwall  rent. 
Item  be  Charles  Pollok  as  prin"  Walter  Dowlgas  his  cau"'  twa  hundreth  punds 

to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  1644  with  ane  half  zeirs  anwal  rent. 
Item  be  Maister  Niniane  Campbell  as  prin"  James  Hamiltoune  and  Robert 

Horner  his  cau'''s  ane  hundreth  punds  money  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes 

1644  with  ane  zeiris  anwal  rent. 
Item  be  James  Scheills  zounger  and  his  caul's  ane  hundreth  markis  money  to 

be  payit  at  Martimes  1644  with  ane  zeirs  anwal  rent. 
Item  be  Androw  Lyill  and  his  cautiouneris  fourtie  punds  money  to  be  payit 

at  Mertimes  1644  with  ane  zeirs  anwal  rent. 
Item  be  David  Colquhoune  as  prin"  Niniane  Patersone  his  cautioner  fyve 

hundreth  markis  money  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  1644  with  ane  zeirs 

anwal  rent. 
Item  be  Robert  Boyd  of  Tourgill  as  prin"  M^  Johne  Dunlop  and  wthers  his 

cautiouneris  conteaning  the  sowme  of  ane  thowsand  markis  money  payable 

at  Mtimes  1644  with  ane  zeirs  anwal  rent. 
Item  be  Robert  Semple  of  Noblestoune  Williame  Weyms  his  cautioner  twa 

hundreth  markis  money  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  1644  with  twa  zeiris 

anwal  rent. 
Item  be  the  Laird  of  Nobleferme  the  persoune  of  Ranfrew  vmq"  M''  Johne 

Hutchesone  of  Scottistoune  fyve  hundrethe  markis  money  to  be  payit 

at  Mertimes  1644  with  ane  zeirs  anwal  rent. 
Item  be  the  Laird  of  EUerslie  as  prin"  Macolme  Crawfuird  of  Cartisburne  and 

Williame  Conynghame  of  Aiket  his  caurs  fyve  hundreth  markis  money 

to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  1644  with  twa  zeirs  of  anwal  rent. 
Item  be  James  Blair  of  Adamtoune  twa  hundrethe  markis  money  to  be  payit 

at  Mertimes  1644  with  ane  zeirs  anwal  rent. 
Item  be  David  Boyd  as  prin"  Richard  Clark  his  caur  ane  thowsand  marks 

money  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  1644  ^^''^h  ane  half  zeirs  arent. 
Item  be  James  Smythe  fyve  hundreth  marks  to  be  payit  at    Mtimes  1644 

with  ane  half  zeirs  anwal  rent. 
Item  be  Robert  Finlay  ane  hundreth  punds  to  be  payit  at  Mtimes  1644  with 

ane  half  zeirs  anwal  rent. 


1645]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  239 

Item  be  Georg  Lyoun  and  his  cau'''^  of  the  sowme  of  thre  hundreth  punds  Lyoun. 

money  to  be  payit  at  Candlemas  1645  with  half  ane  zeirs  arent. 
Item  ane  band  grantit  be  Johne  Bochanane  baxter  as  prin"  and  his  cau^^'s  Bochannane. 

fyve  hundreth  mkis  money  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  1645  with  ane  zeirs 

anwal  rent. 
Item  ane  band  grantit   be  (  )  Hamiltoune  of  Bothuellhauche  as  Bnthiihanrhe. 

prin"  and  M'  Johne  Dunlop  his  cautioner  conteaning  three  hundrethe 

markis  money  for  the  whilk  yair  is  awand  of  at  Mertimes  1644  ane  zeir 

ami  ane  half. 
Item  ane  band  grantit  be  Margaret  Boyd  relict  of  vmq"  M'  James  Fullartoune  Boyd. 

as  prin"   Richard  Allane  hir  cautioner  for  ane  hundrethe  markis  q''of 

thair  is  awand  of  arent  at   Lamas  in  this  instant  zeir  of  God  1644  twa 

zeiris. 
Item  ane  band  grantit  be  Robert  Sympsone  and  his  cau"^'-^  conteaning  fyve  Sympsonc. 

hundreth  markis  money  to  be  payit  at  Candlemas  1645  with  ane  half 

zeiris  anwal  rent. 

Decimo  qninto  Novemhris  1644. 

The  said  day  Andrew  Gray  is  electit  to  be  ane  of  the  sex  poor  men  in  Gray  admitit 
the  hows  and  Androw  Calderwood  to  be  ane  of    the  four  pensiouneris  and 
ordaines  the  collectour  to  by  to  him  three  ells  and  ane  half  of  cloathe  with 
ane  pair  of  new  schoes  and  ane  sark  and  desyres  his  awn  craft  to  help  him 
to  ane  cloak. 

The  said  day  the  dark  lies  gottin  out  twelf  bands  givin  be  severall  persones  Bands, 
conteaning  three  scoir  punds  the  peace  to  be  put  to  execu'une  aganes  thes  wha 
ar  awand  the  same  for  yair  gildrie  fynnes. 

The  said  day  ordaines  the  collecto""  to  pay  to  \^'illiarll  Anderson   thre  Andersone. 
dollors  for  his  supplie. 

The  same  day  the  collecto''  hes  gottine  out  of  ye  box  the  hundreth  threttie  Money 
eight  pund  sevin  schillings  viij  d.  that  he  put  thairin  at  the  making  of  his  <^°"«''^'°'- 
last  compt  and  ordaines  him  to  be  chargit  yairwith  at  ye  making  of  his  nixt 
compt. 

Primo  Januarij  Anno  Domini  1645. 

The  quhilk  day  Mathow  Watsoune  sone  to  Mathow  Watsone  portioner  Prenteis 
of  Gartforie  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Alex''  Woddrop  cordoner  during 
sevin  zeirs  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indento"'  of  ye  dait 
the  twentie  three  day  of  Febniarij  last. 

The  same  day  the  dekine  conveinar  maid  ane  compt  of  certane  moneyis  Compt  dekine 
he  intrometit  yairw*  belonging  to  ye  said  hospitall. 


240 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1645 


Bands  boxit. 


Money  boxit 
and  coUecto'. 


Collecto'. 


Precept. 


Prenteis 
Woddrope. 


Money 
producit. 


In  the  first  thair  was  takin  out  of  ye  box  ane  thowsand  marks. 

Mr  he  receavit  fra  Patrik  Bryce  for  his  gildrie  fyne  Ix  ll 

Mair  he  receavit  fra  Wilham  Weyms  in  name  of  Noblestones  twa  hundreth 
marks  with  twentie  ane  pund  vj  s.  viij  d.  money  of  anwal  rent  preceiding 
Mertimes  and  fra  the  Laird  of  Cowdoun  in  name  of  Robert  Boyd  of  Tourgill 
ane  thowsand  marks  prin''  sowme  and  aught  scoir  marks  of  anwal  rent  yairof 
preceiding  ye  said  terme  and  he  rece^  fra  William  Finlay  for  gildrie  fyne  Ix  tl 
and  fra  David  Colquhoun  fyve  hundreth  marks  money  prin^^  sowme  and 
fourtie  marks  of  anwal  rent  preceiding  Mtimes  last  quhairof  he  lent  out  to 
Hew  Montgomerie  ane  thowsand  marks  and  to  Duncane  Aikin  twa  hundreth 
marks  baith  payable  at  Witsounday  nixt  with  ane  half  zeirs  anwal  rent  and 
to  ye  Laird  of  Overpollok  fyve  hundereth  punds  payable  at  Mertimes  nixt 
with  ane  half  zeirs  anwal  rent  and  the  haUl  three  bands  yairof  ar  put  in  ye  box 
and  ane  thowsand  marks  [  ]  Pollok  for  ye  qlk  Georg  Lyoun  is  to 

be  anserable  for  ye  sowme  and  goodness  of  ye  money  qlk  w'  four  scoir  marks 
of  light  mone}'  the  dekin  conveinar  hes  gottine  out  of  ye  box  to  put  out  ye 
best  he  can  compleitis  the  haill  foirsd  compt  and  the  dekine  conveinar  hes 
debursit  fvftein  punds  whilk  he  is  to  pay  himself. 

Item  thar  is  put  in  ye  box  the  fyve  hundrethe  marks  that  Ro'  Symesone 
was  awand  and  his  band  is  takin  out  and  the  collectC  hes  gottin  twentie  mark 
for  ye  anwal  rent  yairof  for  ve  qlk  he  is  to  be  chargit. 

The  said  day  ordaines  the  dark  to  gev  to  ye  collecto''  Johne  Woddrowis 
band  of  three  scoir  punds  money  for  his  gildrie  fynne  and  he  is  to  be  chargit 
yairwt  at  his  compt  making. 

The  said  day  ordaines  the  dekine  conveinar  to  pay  to  Johne  Jak  maltmane 

for  his  supplie  fourtie  marks. 

xix  Marti j  1645. 
The  said  Johne  Woddrope  sone  to  vmq"  James  Woddrope  sometyme 
indweller  wHn  this  bru*  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  w*  Walter  Stewart  weiver  to 
serve  him  as  prenteis  sevin  zeirs  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye 
indentof  of  ye  dait  of  j-ir  pnts. 

Nono  Maij  1645. 
The  said  day  the  dekine  conveinar  with  the  dekins  and  yair  bretherine 
of  counsall  wha  for  ye  maist  pairt  war  pnt  being  conveinit  Williame  Reid 
officer  producit  three  hundreth  punds  qlk  he  gat  from  thir  persounes  viz 
Johne  Wallace  maltmane  Robert  Caruthers  Ro'  Somervell  James  Watsoune 
tailzo''is  and  George  Finlav  litster  whilk  is  put  in  ye  box  except  ane  hundrethe 
punds  givin  to  ye  collectour  for  supplie  of  3'e  poor  for  the  qlk  he  is  to  be  chargit 
at  the  making  of  his  nixt  compt. 


1645]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  241 

Item  thair  was  producit  bak  againe  fyve  of  ye  12  bands  the  dark  gat  out  Bandis. 
for  ye  gildrie  fynnes  viz  James  Riddells  Johne  Thomsounes  Richard  Flaik- 
feilds  Patrik  Raiffs  and  Johne  Bairds  qlks  ar  put  in  the  box  qlks  fyve  bands 
with  the  foirsaids  three  hundreth  punds  qlk  ye  said  Wilhame  Reid  producit 
for  wther  fyve  bands  of  ye  gildrie  fynnes  with  Wilhame  Finlayis  and  Patrik 
Bryces  bands  compleitis  ye  twelf  bands  ye  dark  gat  out. 

Of  the  four  scoir  markis  the  dekine  conveinar  gat  out  at  his  last  Johne  Memoranda™. 
Jak  maltmane  gat  fourtie  marks  and  the  collector  hes  gott  xxv  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
for  the  qlk  he  is  to  be  chargit  at  yc  nixt  compt  and  ye  dekine  conveinar  wants 
his  XV  ll  zett. 

The  said  day  ordaines  that  thrie  scoir  punds  awand  be  ye  said  James  Precept 

,  '     ,        ,  ,         •    •       i       T-1-  Hammutoun. 

Riddell   for  his  gildne  fynne  conforme  to   his  band  to  be  givin   to    tliezar 

Hamiltoun  skynnar  for  his  help  and  supplie. 

The  said  day  ordaines  the  quarterlie  payment  that  was  wont  to  be  payit  Scott. 
to  James  Muir  cordoner  to  be  payit  now  to  Robert  Scott  maltmane  and  to 
begin  now  at  this  Beltoun. 

The  said  day  thair  is  ordainit  to  be  payit  be  the  collectour  to  Jonet  Lyoune  I-youn. 
sextein  marks  and  scho  is  never  to  be  hard  agane. 

xi]  Maij  1645. 
The  said  day  Thomas  Glen  sone  law"  to  Johne  Glen  warkman  in  Glasgow  Prenteis  Glen. 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Johne  Aikinheid  weifer  burges  yof  for  ye  space 
of  sevin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indento^ 
of  ye  dait  ye  last  day  of  Apryll  last. 

Nono  Jtilij  1645. 

The  whilk  day  the  dekine  conveinar  with  the  dekines  of  craftis  of  the  Cowperis. 
said  brughe  wha  for  the  maist  pt  being  convenit  w^in  ye  tolbuith  of  this  bru' 
for  hearing  of  ane  complaint  givin  in  befoir  them  be  Androw  Pettigrew 
W'llliame  Scheillis  and  Johne  Robesone  cowpers  for  themselfs  and  in  name 
and  behalf  of  the  rest  of  ye  poor  bretherine  of  the  said  voca'une  against 
Cuthbert  Greg  pnt  dekine  yairof  quhairin  they  alledgit  that  he  had  boght 
twentie  ane  hundreth  rungs  for  the  vse  of  the  said  calling  qlks  he  sould  have 
delt  to  the  haill  bretherine  of  ye  foirsd  calling  als  weill  poor  as  ritch  conforme 
to  ye  acts  and  statutes  yairof  and  ane  decreit  of  the  dekine  conveinar  and 
dekines  of  crafts  of  the  samyne  bru'  for  the  tyme  sett  doune  yairanent  zit 
notw*standing  he  dealt  to  the  calling  fourtein  hundreth  yof  and  sevine  hundreth 
of  the  samyn  he  keipit  to  deall  to  thes  as  pleasit  him  best  qlk  complaint  being 
red  in  pns  of  the  said  Cuthbert  Greg  he  grantit  the  samyne  alledgance  to  be 

Q 


242  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1645 

trew  and  he  being  removit  the  said  dekine  conveiner  and  dekins  after  con- 
sidera'une  yof  finds  that  he  had  done  ane  great  and  manifest  wrang  not 
becoming  his  place  and  becaus  he  promeist  not  to  do  the  lyk  heirefter  they 
vnlawit  only  in  fyve  punds  money  and  ordaines  him  to  remayne  in  ward  whill 
the  samy  be  payit,  and  becaus  it  was  alledgit  be  ye  said  Cuthbert  Greg  that 
thair  ar  certane  bretherine  of  the  said  calling  wha  refuiss  yair  lotts  of  comoune 
barganes  q"  they  please  and  takis  yair  pairts  yof  onlie  when  they  find  it  for 
thair  comoditie  thairfoir  the  said  dekine  conveinar  and  dekins  statuts  and 
ordaines  that  q*  brother  of  the  said  calling  soiild  happine  to  refuis  heirefter 
his  p'  of  ony  comoune  bargane  he  being  law""^  warnit  to  yat  effect  he  sail  get 
na  pt  or  portioune  of  ony  comoune  bargan  belonging  to  the  sd  craft  for  three 
tymes  thairefter. 

Vndecimo  August]  1645. 

Band  takin  The  said  day  Hew  Montgomerie  his  band  givin  to  Ro'  Horner  to  receave 

the  thousand  markis  money  and  thrie  quarters  of  ane  zeirs  anuall  rent  contenit 
thairintill. 


out. 


Caiderwood  ia  The  Said  day  ordanes  Williame  Caulderwood  to  be  admitit  in  the  hospitall 

ye  hospitall.      .^^  ^.^^^j,  j^j^^^  Qeddes  his  place. 

wusone  Ite  ordanes  Michaell  Wilsoune  to  be  ane  pensioner  and  to  have  qrterlie 

pensionar.         ^^^^  markis  money  in  the  place  that  Rot  Scott  had. 

The  whOk  day  the  deacon  conveinar  with  the  dekins  of  craftis  and  thair 

bretherine  of  counsall  being  cyvenit  they  be  pluralitie  of  voites  did  elect  and 

noiat  Williame  and  Walter  Neilsones  and  Gawin  Neisbit  to  be  pntit  to  ye 

provest  baillies  and  counsall  of  this  bru'  to  ye  effect  ane  of  them  might  be 

electit  deikin  conveinar  of  this  bru'  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  and  ordaines  this  lyit 

to  be  pntit  be  Johne  Reid  deikine  of  ye  hamermen  and  yis  lyit  being  refusit 

be  ye  saids  provest  baillies  and  counsall  for  the  causs  and  in  manner  contenit 

in  the  counsall  book  and  (  )  dayes  eftir  yis  Ninian  Gilhagie  being 

electit  deacone  conveinar  be  ye  said  provest  baillies  and  counsall  he  and  the 

deacons  of  crafts  nominat  the  persounes  following  to  be  on  y""  counsell  for  ye 

zeir  enschewing. 

The  names  of  ye  dekins 

Johne  Reid  M''  Rot  Mayne 

Johne  Miller  Walter  Bryce 

Jon  Cauldwall  W"»  Reid 

Jo"  Scot  George  Brume 

Johne  Baird  James  Pedie 

Johne  Boyd  Georg  Lyoune 

Andro  Jaip 
The.  Lowrie 


1645]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 

Peter  Johnstoune  baillie 


243 


Adame  Nicoll 
Wm  Birrell 
Henrie  Robesone 
James  Duncane 
Thomas  Hendersone 

Ro*  Horner 
Rot  Boyd 
James  Ogilvie 
Johne  Birscat 
David  Scheirar 

Ro'  Finlay 
Richard  Allane 
Ro*  Hogiszaird 
Henrie  Merschell 
Williame  Coatts 


Thomas  Scot 
Jo"  Bochannane 

Patrik  Clark 
Jo"  Falconer 
Jo"  Patersone 


Johne  Stewart  elder 
Rot  Cauldwall 


W"  Neilsone 
Walter  Neilsone 
James  Moresone 
\Vm  Lightbodie 
Johne  Wallace 

Mathow  Colquhoime 
Rot  Reid  zounger 
James  Colquhoune 


David  Boyd 
Alex''  Colquhoune 


Manasses  Lyill 
Jo"  Auldcorne 

Cuthbert  Greg 
Jo"  Zoung 

Patrik  Brounsyd 


Tho.  Hutchesoune 
Thomas  Atchesone 

Georg  Muir 


Chirur.  IP  James  Hamiltoun 

The  said  day  the  four  persones  following  war  electit  be  pluralitie  of  voites 
to  sit  for  the  craftis  of  this  brut  vpon  the  deane  of  gilds  counsall  for  the  zeir 
enschewing  viz  Manasses  Lyill  Richard  Allane  Johne  Myller  deacone  of  ye 
tailzoi's  and  Johne  Bochannane  baxter. 


Vndecimo  Novembris  1645. 

The  whilk  day  Georg  Lyoune  lait  collectour  maid  his  compt  of  his  intro- 
missioune  with  the  hospitalls  goods  this  zeir  last  bypast  qrof  chairg;  and  dis- 
charg  foUowes. 


244 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1645 


Legacie 
Flemvng. 


Sympsone. 

Smythe. 
Boyd. 

Blair. 

Sheillis. 

Campbell. 

Nobleferme. 

Montgomrie- 
L>-ill. 

Boyd. 

Lyoun. 


Chairg. 
In  the  first  receavit  fra  Johne  Woddrow  for  his  gildrie  fyne  .  Ix  I1 

Item  receavit  fra  Johne  Auldcorne  for  ij  Hght  ryalls  at  tlirie  mark  and  ane 

half  ye  peice  ....  xxv  li  viiij  s.  iiijd. 

Item  receavit  of  legacie  that  was  left  be  vmq^i  James  Fleyming  cordoner      x  ll 
Item  he  receavit  out  of  the  box  be  ane  act  of  ye  dait  ye  15  of  No'  last 

j<=xxxviij  ll  vi)  s.  8d. 
Mair  receavit  out  of  ye  box  conform  to  ane  act  of  the  dait  ye  9  of  Maij  last  j<=  li 
Item  receavit  fra  ye  deacones  of  quarter  comptis     .  .  .       ij'^ix  li 

Qrof  ten  marks  was  receavit  fra  the  listers  and  fyve  mks  fra  the  gairdners. 
Item  receavit   fra  Thomas  Sympsone  for  the  arent  of  500  markis  conform  to 

ane  act  conteined  in  the  book  of  ye  dait  the  first  day  of  Januarij  last 

xiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  receavit   fra  James   Smyth  for  the  arent  of  fyve  hundreth  markis  fra 

Witsounday  1644  to  Witsounday  1645  .  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  Barbara  Boyd  relict  of  vmq"  Maister  James  Fullaitoune 

for  the  arent  of  ane  hundreth  marks  for  the  terme  of  Lambes  1644  and 

preceiding        .  .  .  .  .  .       x  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  James  Blair  of  Adametoune  for  the  anuall  of  twa  hundreth 

marks  the  termes  of  Witsonday  and  Mertimes  1644  x  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  James  Scheills  for  the  anuall  of  ane  hundreth  marks  ye  said 

zeir     .  .  .  .  .  .  .        V  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  receaved  fra  Maister  Niniane  Campbell  for  the  arent  of  ane   hundreth 

punds  ye  zeir  foirsaid  .....  viij  li 

Item  receavit  fra  the  Laird  of   Nobleferme   for  the  arent  of  fyve  hundreth 

markis  for  the  space  of  ane  zeir  and  thrie  quarters  <]^ol  now  ye  prin" 

sowme  is  put  in  to  the  box     .  .  .  xlvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  Hew  Montgomery  for  thrie  quarters  arent  of  1000  mks  now 

payit  into  the  box       .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  ll 

Item  receavit  fra  Androw  Lyill  for  the  arent  of  fourtie  punds  the  termes  of 

Witsounday  and  Mertimes  1644  and  Witsounday  1645  vj  li  viij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  receavit  fra  David  Boyd  for  ye  arent  of  1000  marks  Iiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  the  compter  charges  himself  with  the  sowme  following  adebtit  be  himself 

for  the  arent  of  three  hundreth  punds  awand  be  himself  and  his  cautioner 

to  ye  said  hospitall  and  that  for  the  termes  of  Candlemes  and  Lambes 

last     ........        xxiiij  li 

Suffia  of  the  discharge  [?  charge]  is    vij<=lxxxviij  li  ij  s.  viij  d. 


Dischairge. 
In  the  first  the  compter  dischargis  himself  with  the  sowmes  following  debursed 
be  him  to  the  persones  efter  mentionat  viz  to  William  Calderwood  for 
two  pair  of  schoone     .  .  .  .  .  .  iij  ll 


1645]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  245 

Item  for  ane  pair  of  schoone  to  Andre  Gray  .  .  .  xxx  s. 

Item  debursit  to  Johne  Bryssoune  for  Ires  .  .  •         xviij  s. 

Item   for  ane  stand  of  cloathes  to  Androw  Calderwood  •     xj  ll  v  s. 

Item  for  ane  chist  and  scheit  to  David  Leslie         .  .  .  iij  ll  xij  s. 

Item  given  to  Johne  Allansone  elder  weiver  .  .  •  liiij  s. 

Item  for  stra  peits  and  coalls  at  severall  tymes      .  .  xxv  li  xij  s. 

Item  for  oyll  to  ye  musquets  .  .  •  •  .  xij  s. 

Item  givin  to  Williame  Caulderwood  for  dressing  of  the  musquetis 

xxvj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  to  Williame  Reid  for  ingathering  some  gildrie  fynnes  .  xl  s. 

Item  debursit  to  the  dekine  conveinar  that  was  awand  to  him  xv  "ll 

Item  givin  to  Helein  Bogle  for  attending  vmqH  David  Leslie  and  wasching  of 

his  cloathes  the  tyme  of  his  seiknes    .  .  .  liij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  givin  to  vmq"  Johne  Geddes  wyf      .  .  .  .  vj  tl 

Item  debursit  to  vmq"  Johne  Geddes  in  extraordinars  the  tyme  of  his  seiknes 

iij  li 
Item  for  sex  pair  of  schoone  to  the  poor  men  in  the  hows  .      ix  ll  x  s. 

Item  to  the  dark  for  his  fiall         .  .  .  .  .  xx  ll 

Item  for  ane  pair  of  hois  to  Andro  Gray  ....  xxiij  s. 
Item  for  nyne  scoir  ells  of  cloathes  to  be  shirts  scheits  lynings  and  poutches 

to  ye  poor  men  .  .  .  .  •  1  ll  xiij  s. 

Item  for  buttounes  and  threid        .....  xvj  s. 

Item  for  cloath  to  be  cloathes  and  cloaks  to  ye  poor  men  Ixxxvj  ll  xv  s. 

Mr  to  them  for  y^  haill  quarters  pay'         .  .  .  ij'^lxxxviij  li 

Item  to  the  four  penschiouners  ....  liij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  to  Williame  Calderwood  at  severall  tymes  when  he  was  in  the  Muir  and 

inclosit  in  the  hows     .....(  ) 

Item  to  Androw  Lyill  at  severall  tymes  for  making  of  cloathes  xj  ll  xix  s. 
Item  debursit  to  severall  poor  persones  at  Hallowmes  court  Ij  ll  xij  s.  viij  d. 
Mair  to  them  at  Candlemas  court  .  .  Ixj  li  xvij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  debursit  to  them  at  Beltane  court  .  xlv  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

M'  debursit  at  Lambes  court  .  .  .         xxxvj  li  xviij  s.  viij  d. 

Item  debursit  to  Williame  Calderwood  at  severall  tymes  when  he  was  out  in 

the  Muir  and  inclosit  in  his  hows         .  .  xxiij  ll  xj  s.  viij  d. 

Suriia    of    the    haill    discharge    is  viij^xxvj  ll  iij  s.  viij  d. 

Swa  charge  and  discharge  being  calculat  the  compter  is  fund 
superexpendit  in  ...  xxx  ll  j  s.  iiij  d. 

Quhilk  sowme  is  payit  to  him  as  followes.  He  receavit  fra  Walter  Neilsone 
twentie  twa  pund  ane  schilling  iiij  d.  whilk  he  gat  the  last  zeir  fra  the  burgess 
and  gildbrether  and  the  haill  rest  he  hes  gottine  out  of  the  box  with  eight 
punds  farder  for  his  extraordinar  chairges  and  paines  the  twa  zeirs  of  his  office. 


246 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1645 


Money 
collecto'. 


Bands  takin 
out. 


Collecto'. 


Patersone  in 
ye  hospitall. 


Prenteis 
Scheillis. 


Bands 
producit. 


Stewart. 


To  report. 


The  said  day  the  dark  is  continoued  and  Williame  Reid  is  newHe  electit 
ofiBcer  quha  gave  his  aithe  as  vse. 

The  same  day  be  pluralitie  of  voites  Johne  Birscat  tailzo''  is  electit  col- 
lectC  for  the  zeir  to  come. 

Decimo  quarto  No"'  1645. 

The  whilk  day  compeirit  Johne  Birscat  who  was  of  befoir  electit  collecto' 
for  the  zeir  to  come  and  acceptit  ye  said  oflQce  in  and  vpon  him  and  gave  his 
aithe  as  vse  is. 

16  Fe^'  1646. 
The  said  day  Williame  Reid  producit  ye  sowme  contenit  in  ye  old  rentall 
extending  to  Ij  ll  vi]  s.  viij  d.  for  ye  last  zeir  and  he  gat  back  aught  marks 
for  his  paines  and    ye  collecto"^  receavit  1  li  .\i.\  s.  with  ye  whUk  he  is  to  be 
chargit  at  ye  making  of  his  compt. 

The  said  day  the  dekin  convenar  has  gottin  out  ye  bands  following  viz 
Ellersleis  vmqi^  Macolme  Crawfurds  Bodilhauchis  w'  ye  Ires  of  horning  aganes 
S''  Thomas  Boyd  and  his  caul's. 

The  same  day  the  collector  hes  gottin  out  Patrik  Raif  and  Johne  Thome- 
sones  bands  grantit  for  y  gildrie  fynes  and  he  is  to  be  chargit  ywith  at  his 
compt. 

The  said  day  Johne  Patersone  maltman  is  admitit  and  receavit  to  be  ane 
of  ye  sex  ordinar  poore  in  ye  hous  and  is  to  receave  his  dewis  with  ye  rest  fra 
Candlemas  last. 

xviij  Marti]  1646. 

The  said  day  Mathow  Scheillis  law''  sone  to  vmq'^  Williame  Scheillis 
in  Titwood  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Williame  Kno.x  tailzo^"  during  ye 
space  of  sevin  zeiris  and  twa  zeiris  as  servand  conforme  to  ye  indento''  maid 
betuixt  yem  of  ye  dait  the  penult  of  Julij  last. 

XV  Maij  1646. 
The  said  day  the  dekine  convenar  producit  back  agane  Ellersleis  and 
vmq'fi  Macolme  Crawfurd  band  whilk  ar  put  in  ye  box. 

Ordanis  the  baillie  [and]  dekine  convenar  to  go  [to]  James  Stewart  and  to 
give  him  grait  thankis  for  ye  guid  will  he  hes  to  ye  hous  and  poore  yin  anent 
ye  off  he  hes  maid  of  his  zaird  and  they  ar  to  tak  ony  wy  w'  ye  they  pleas. 

The  said  day  ordanis  Ro*  Horner  and  George  Lj'oun  to  speik  Ro'  Campbell 
anent  his  vmq'«  fatheris  legacie  and  Thomas  Scott  to  speik  Margaret  Monteithe 
anent  hir  vmq'^  husbandis  legacie  and  to  report  ye  nixt  melting. 


1646]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  247 

The  said  day  ordanis  Ro'  Horner  and  Thomas  Scott  to  vse  y  best  dihgence  Anent 

.  •'  J  u  muskats. 

for  inbringing  of  ye  muskats  y'  ar  amissing. 

The  said  day  Johne  Aultlcorne  lait  dekine  of  skynneris  gave  in  his  muscat  Muskats. 
and  Thomas  Scott  is  ordanit  to  receave  muscatts  fra  thir  personis  viz  Adame 
Nicoll  Henrie  Merschell  David  Boyd  Cuthbert  Grege  and  ordanis  ye  pnt  new 
dekins  to  giv  in  y  muskatis  aught  dayis  efter  ye  nixt  fair  of  Glasgw  without 
delay  wnder  ye  paine  of  fyve  punds  ilk  ane  of  yem  by  and  atto^  y  muskats. 


The  said  day  ordanis  Williame  Farie  tailzof  to  get  ye  pensioun  of  twentie  Farie 
ks  mo^y  quartei 
to  begin  pntlic  yto. 


marks  mo^y  quarterlie  y'  was  payit  of  befoir  to  James  Scheillis  cordoner  and  P'^"^'°"'^' 


The  said  day  the  dekine  convenar  hes  takin  out  of  ye  box  the  Ire  of  gildrie  Le/toe  of 
sub'  be  vmq'6  Ai'^  Heygait. 

28  Maij  1646. 

The  said  day  Johne  Reid  sone  to  Johne  Reid  carter  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  Prenteis  Reid 
with  ArJ  Glen  weifer  during  ye  space  of  sevine  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris 
for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  3*6  indento''  of  ye  dait  ye  twentie  fyv  of    Maij 
instant. 

7  Jiilij  1646. 

The  said  day  James  Robesone  sone  to  vmqi^  Stephana  Robesone  is  buikit  Prenteis 
heirin  prenteis  with  Robert  Robesone  baxter  to  serve  him  as  prenteis  during  '^ot)<=5°"«- 
sevin  zeiris  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indento''  daitit  3'e 
6  of  Julij  instant. 

The  said  day  James  Moresone  sone  to  Thomas  Moresone  carter  is  buikit  Prenteis 
heirin  prenteis  with  James  Robesone  baxter  to  serve  him  sevin  zeirs  as  prenteis  M°'^<=^°"e- 
and  twa  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indento''  of  ye  dait  ye  fiftein  of  (  ). 

xiiij  August  1646. 

The  said  day  ordans  everie  dekine  to  convein  y  callingis  and    to  requyr  Muskatis. 
everie  man  who  hes  ony  of  ye  muskats  y'  belongis  to  ye  hous  that  they  bring 
in  ye  same  within  twentie  dayis  wywayis  to  be  haldin  and  reput  as  infamous 
and  to  pay  ten  punds  by  ye  restitu^un  of  ye  muskat. 

Ordanis  ye  dekins  to  produce  and  bring  in  y""  muskatis  betuixt  and  this  Muskatis. 
day  aught  dayis  or  then  to  pay  ten  punds  mo^v  ilk  ane  of  yem  to  ye  dekin 
convenar  by  ye  giving  of  ye  muskats. 

The  said  day  Henrie  Merschell  lait  dekine  of  cordoneris  and  Cuthbert  Muskatis. 
Grege  lait  dekine  of  cowperis  gave  in  y  muskats  onlie  bot  not  y  bandaliers. 


24S 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1646 


Prenteiss.  The  said  day  ordanis  Manasses  Lyill   Robert   Horner  Walter  Neilsone 

and  George  Lyoun  to  meit  togidder  and  conv-ein  befoir  them  (  ) 

Listoun  sone  to  vinq"'  James  Listoun  cordoner  {  )  Roxbrughe 

sone  to  Johne  Roxbrughe  offi''  (  )   Mitchell  sone  to   Michaell 

Mitchell  (  )  Fischer  sone  to  vmq'e  ArthC  Fischer  tailzC's  and 

(  )  Cors  sone  to  Johne  Cors  quha  desyris  all  to  be  bund  as  pren- 

teiss and  put  to  crafts  in  respect  thair  parentis  ar  not  able  to  do  for  ye  nather 
meanis  to  bestow  vpoun  ye  and  to  tak  notice  of  y  severall  estaits  and  to  tak 
ye  panis  to  bind  ye  as  prenteiss  to  severall  tred  as  they  sail  best  agrie  to  and 
to  yis  effect  to  bestow  wpoun  ye  as  they  sail  think  convenient  ane  hundrethe 
marks  money  as  being  ane  part  of  yes  moneyis  ye  hous  is  to  get  in  fra  yes  men 
who  gat  licens  to  sell  y  tobacco  in  yir  p*s. 

Warrand.  The  said  day  ordanis  ye  collecto''  to  give  to  Williame  Wallace  fourtie 

niarkis  mo^y  to  help  to  repair  his  kill  y*  was  laitlie  brunt  and  to  George  Hutche- 
sone  fyve  punds  ten  schillingis  to  help  to  by  ane  silver  spoone  to  his  sone  who 
is  put  to  ye  college  as  ane  bursor  and  to  give  W"  Reid  y  offif  ten  pund  to  by 
ane  stand  of  clothis. 


Decimo  quarto  Odobris  1646. 

The  said  day  the  dekines  of  craftis  being  convenit  with  ye  most  part  of 
y"'  bretherine  of  counsell  for  electing  tliree  of  y  number  to  be  pnt  to  ye  balleis 
and  counsell  so  yt  ane  of  ye  may  be  dekine  convenar  for  ye  zeir  to  cum  they 
electit  be  pluralitie  of  voitis  Jo°  Andersone  Manasses  Lyill  and  Walter  Neilsone 
three  of  y''  nwmber  to  ye  effect  foirsd  and  ye  lytts  to  be  presentit  be  Patrik 
Clark  and  Cuthbert  Grege. 

Thairefter  the  sd  Manasses  Lyill  is  electit  dekin  convenar  and  followis 
ye  names  of  his  counsel]. 


Alex''  Jafra 
Ro'  Horner 
Johne  Wilsone 
Thomas  Scott 
Patrik  Clark 
Johne  Stewart  elder 


Johne  Reid 
Henrie  Robesone 
James  Duncane 
Arthor  Taccatis 


M"'  James  Hamiltoun 
Walter  Neilsone 
Mathow  Colquhoun 
David  Boyd 
Johne  Bar 
William  Scheillis 
Patrik  Brounsyd 
James  Dowgall 

Williame  NeUsone  baillie 

Niniane  Gilhagie 
Johne  Mure 
James  Moresone 
Ro'  Patersone 


yis  alterit  heirefter 


Thir  ar  alterit  vpon 
the  3  of  Fe^iJ  1647 
be  ye  pnt  visitur. 


1646]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


249 


Williame  Phillip 
Peter  Johnesone 
Johne  Millar 
Ro'  Boyd 
Jon  Birscatt 
James  Ogilvie 

Johne  Andersone 
Ritchard  Allane 
Johne  Wilsone 
Adame  Wilsone 
David  Clark 

Jo"  Scott 

Johne  Buchannan 

Jo°  Hutchesone 

Johne  Baird 
Johne  Falconer 
Johne  Patersone 

Johne  Boyd 
Robert  Cauldwall 


Johne  MUlar 
James  Colquhoun 
W™  Reid 
Johne  Cors 


George  Brwme 
Alex''  Colquhoun 

Manasses  Lyill 
W"  Hunter 
Johne  Auldcorne 


George  Lyoun 
Cuthbert  Greg 


Androw  Jaip 

William  Howie 
George  Finlay 
Thomas  Hutchesone 

George  Mur 
Johne  Woddrow 


Tertio  Decemhris  1646  zeirs. 

The  qlk  day  Johne  Briscat  last  collector  maid  compt  of  his  intromissioune  Compt 
with  ye  puires  guids  since  the  tyme  of  his  admissioune.  Bnscat. 

And  in  the  first  he  charget  himself  with  ye  haill  quarter  compts  receavit  fra 

ye  deacones  and  from  the  litsteris  extending  to  .  .  ij^ix  li 

Item  receavit  fra  James  Morisoune  Patrick  Raulff  and  Johne  Thomsoune  ilk 

ane  of  them  thrie  scoir  pundis  for  the  gilderie  fynes  inde        ii^lxxxll 

Item  receavit  fra  William  Reid  for  small  dewties  conteanit  in  ye  rentall 

1  ll  xix  s. 
Item  fra  James  Blair  of  Adamtoune  for  the  anual  of  twa  hundreth  merkis 

fra  Mertimes  1644  to  Mertimes  1645     .  .  .      x  ti  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  Robert  Findlay  for  ye  arent  of  ane  hundreth  pundis  the  termes  of 

Mertimes  1644  Witsounday  and  Mertimes  1645  .  .  xij  ll 

Ite  receavit  fra  M^  Ninian  Campbell  for  ye  arent  of  ane  hundreth  punds  fra 

Mtimes  1644  to  Mertimes  1645  .  .  .  .  viij  ll 


250  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1646 

Item  receavit  fra  James  Smithe  for  ye  auall  of  fyve  hundreth  merks  fra  Wit- 

sonday  1645  to  Witsonday  1646  .  .  xxvj  l  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  ye  ex"  of  vmq'i  James  King  for  ye  arent  of  ane  thousand 

merks  fra  Witsonday  1645   to  Witsounday  1646  at  qlk  tyme  the  prin'^ 

sowme  was  lent  to  ye  Countes  of  Eghngtoune  .  xUx  ll  viij  s. 

Receavit  fra  Charles  Pollock  the  auall  of  twa  hundreth  punds  fra  Witsounday 

1644  to  Witsounday  1645         .....  xvj  li 

Item  receavit  fra  ye  Laird  of  Overpollok  for  ye  arent  of  500I1  fra  Mertimes 

1644  to  Mtimes  1645  .  .  .  xxxvij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

And  to  compleit  the  haill  zeirs  anual  rent  the  deacone  conveiner  hes  in  his 

hands  ane  meikle  xxxvj  s.  peice  in  steid  of  ane  dollof  qlk  compleits  ye 

haill  arent. 

Summa  of  ye  chairges  .  .  v'lxxxxix  li  xiij  s. 

Dischairge. 
Imprimis  deburseit  to  ye  sax  puir  men  in  the  hous  twa  hundreth  four  scoir 

twa  pundis. 
Item  to  ye  four  pentionaris  ....     Iiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  debursit  for  sevintene  ellis  and  tlirie  qrters  of  claith  to  be  y^^  claithes  at 

severall  tymes  at  xl  s.  the  ell  ...  xxxv  li  x  s. 

Item  for  ane  pair  of  blanketts  to  Johne  Patersoune       .         iiij  li  v  s.  vj  d. 
Item  for  41  ells  and  a  quarter  of  gainehecklings  to  be  scheitts  sarks  and  lyneing 

to  ye  puir  men  at  (  )  schilling  four  penneis  ye  ell 

xvj  ll  xvij  s. 
Item  for  making  of  the  claithes  blankettis  sarks  and  for  buttones  and  threid   v  li 
Item  for  sax  pair  of  schoone  to  them         .  •  .  x  li  xvj  s. 

Mair  for  ane  cord  to  the  bell  with  tar  and  clireisch  y^^to     .  .  xiiij  s. 

Item  for  coalls  and  peitts  to  ye  hous  .  .  .  xxiij  li  x  s. 

Item  for  ane  kist  and  windowing  scheit  to  William  Calderwood  vj  li 

Item  for  regratioun  of  Bothuallhauchis  band  .  .  .  iiij  li 

Item  to  William  \\'allace  to  helpe  to  repair  his  kill  that  was  brunt 

xxvj 
Item  to  ye  clerk    ...... 

Item  to  Ro»  Alex"^  to  helpe  Johne  Scotts  prenteis  fie  vj 

Item  for  ane  kist  to  keip  the  match 

Item  for  6  laid  of  sand       ..... 

Mair  to  ye  officer  for  his  claithes   .... 

Mair  to  the  puir  pentionaris  conform  to  ye  four  warrands  givin  at  the  four 

ordinar  meittings         ....  j^^lxj  H  x  s.  viij  d. 

Item  to  vmq"  James  Scheills         .....        xxiiij  s. 
Item  to  vmq"  W'"  Calderwood  in  his  seickness      .  .  .  xxx  s. 

Summa  of  ye  discharges        .  .  vj^lix  ll  viij  s.  ij  d. 


H 

xiij  s. 

iiij  d. 
XX  li 

ll 

xiij  s. 

iiij  d. 

.   iij  ll 

xij  s. 

xij  s. 

xH 

1647]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  251 

And  swa  charge  and  discharge  being  calculat  the  compter  is 
superexpendit       .  .  .  .  .       hx  ll  xv  s.  ij  d. 

The  sd  day  WilUam  Reid  produceit  the  moneyis  conteanit  in  ye  small 
r entail  extending  to  .  .  .  .  .     Ivj  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

And  he  gat  bak  aucht  merk  for  his  panes.      Swa  restit        .  .  Ij  li 

And  Johne  Miller  produceit  the  money  he  gat  the  last  zeir  from  the  burgess 
and  gild  brother  e.xtending  to  twentie  aucht  pundis  thrie  schillings  and  baith 
that  sowme  and  the  fiftie  ane  pundis  givin  in  be  W™  Reid  is  givin  to  ye  sd 
Johne  Briscatt  and  he  being  payit  of  his  lix  tl  xv  s.  ijd.  thair  rests  awand  in 
his  hand  for  the  qlk  he  is  to  be  charget     .  .  xix  li  xvij  s.  iiij  d. 

The  said  [day]  William  Muir  sone  lau"  to  Johne  Muir  in  Titwood  is  buiket  Muir  prenteis. 
heirin  prenteis  to  Johne  Walker  maltman  burges  of  yis  bru'  dureing  the  space 
of  seivine  zeirs  conforme  to  ye  indento''  past  betwix  them  yanent  of  ye  dait 
of  yk  pnts. 

Terlio  Februarij  1647. 

Thomas  Scott  pnt  deacone  of  the  baxteris  being  pnttit  to  the  pnt  magrats  Deacone 
and  counsell  on  leitt  with  W'^^  and  Walter  Neilsounes  is  maid  choyse  of  10  be  '^°^'^^^^^^- 
deacone  conveiner  to  the  nixt  electioune  and  with  ye  deacones  hes  condis- 
cendit  that  the  haill  old  counsell  sail  stand  except  Johne  Wallace  being  electit 
visito''  of  the  maltman  in  place  of  Walter  Neilsoune  is  put  on  for  him  and  he 
nominat  the  persounes  fallowing  to  be  on  lyt  of  ye  persounes  fallowing  viz 
\Vm  Neilsone  Williame  Ly'bodie  Walter  Bryce  Jo"  Gilhagie  Ai'^  Semple. 

Decimo  qiiinto  Februarij  1647. 

The  said  day  Johne  Briscat  is  continowit  collecto''  to  the  nixt  electioune  CoUecto'. 
and  the  boix  was  produceit  be  Ninian  Gilhagie  and  givin  to  the  pnt  deacone 
conveiner  and  ane  band  granttit  be  the  Countes  of  Eglingtoune  of  ane  thousand 
merks  givin  also  to  the  deacon  conveiner  to  ye  ni.xt  meitting  w'  the  bulk  of 
the  gildrie. 

The  same  day  the  officeris  is  continowit. 

The  sd  day  James  Baird  wreicht  being  knowne  to  be  puir  and  become  Baird  in 
waik  sichtit  is  placet  as  ane  of  the  sax  men  of  the  hospitall  to  be  susteinit  °^'"'  ' 
y^'in  conforme  as  ye  rest  ar. 

Octavo  Aprilis  1647. 

The    sd    day  Johne    Mayne  sone  to  Andro  Mayne  workman    is  bundin  Mayne 
prenteis  to  Johne  Browne  cordoner  for  seivine  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  ^^^^  ^^' 
for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ane  indentor  daitit  ye  23  of  Januar  1646. 


252 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1647 


Baud  taken 
out. 


Musquetts. 


Decimo  Maij  1647. 
The  sd  day  the  band  of  vmq'i  Macolm  Crawfuird  and  his  cau'^s  is  takein 
out  and   gevin  to  the  deacone  conveaner  to  be  regrat  or  then  to  get  in  the 
money. 

Johne  Scott 

Memorandum  Walter  Bryce  Adame  Nicoll  Johne  Caldwell  and  Thomas 
Louries  musquetts  ar  broucht  and  thair  want  none  that  sould  hawe  beine 
broucht  in  for  ye  1646  zeirs  bot  Johne  Reids  and  Johne  Milleris  and  thair 
wants  for  the  zeir  1647  musketts  fra  Alex""  Jafray  Johne  Wallace  Johne  Bar 
William  Scheills  and  James  Dougall. 

xiiij  of  Maij  1647. 

p^teb""*  The  sd  day   Thomas  Sympsoune  lau'i  sone  to    James    Sympsoune    in 

Abotisinsche  is  buikeit  heirin  prenteis  with  James  Sympsoune  cordoner  to 
serve  seavin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the 
indento^  daittit  the  xxj  of  October  last  bypast. 

xix  of  Maij  1647. 

Muir  prenteis.  The  Said  day  Johne  Muir  sone  to  Abrahame  Muir  weivar  in  Craigend  is 

buikeit  prenteis  to  Johne  Duncane  wivar  dureing  the  space  of  seavine  zeirs 
conforme  to  the  indento^  daittit  ye  26  of  March  1647. 

Quarto  Augustj  1647. 

Louk  prenteis.  The  sd  day  David  Louk  sone  laull  to  Johne  Louk  in  Carmylle  is  buikit 

heirin  prenteis  with  William  Scott  tailzo''  burges  of  yis  bru'  dureing  the  space 
of  seivin  zeiris  and  twa  zeirs  y^'efter  for  meit  and  fie  conform  to  ye  indentor 
maid  betwixt  the  of  ye  daitt  ye  fyfteine  day  of  Maij  last  was. 


Stewarts 
contract. 


Musquetts. 


Nona  Augustj  1647. 

The  sd  day  the  contract  past  betwix  James  Stewart  the  deane  of  gUd 
and  his  merchands  and  ye  deacone  conveaner  and  deacones  of  craftis  and 
vyrs  of  his  counsell  anent  the  hous  and  zaird  mortefeit  be  the  sd  James  Stewart 
to  ye  deacone  conveiner  deacones  of  craftis  and  yair  successor's  nixt  now 
adjacent  to  thair  hospitall  being  red  in  pns  of  ye  deacone  conveaner  deacones 
and  all  being  convenet  was  allowit  and  approvin  and  was  ordanet  to  be  sub' 
be  ye  sd  deacone  conveaner  deacones  of  craftis  and  vyrs  of  yair  counsell  wha 
sail  be  requyrit  to  yat  effect. 

The  sd  day  Alex"'  Jafray  deacone  of  hemermen  and  WOliam  Scheills 
deacone  of  coupers  gawe  in  thair  musquetts  and  bandileareis  qlk  ar  put  vpe 
with  the  rest. 


1647]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  253 

The  said  day  the  deacone  conveaner  deacones  of  craftis  and  yr  counsell  Blair, 
being  conveanit  and  being  informeit  that  M""  Hew  Blair  was  sought  to  be 
transportit  they  yrfore  ordaneit  ane  supphca'une  to  be  drawin  vpe  in  yair 
names  and  to  be  pntit  to  the  proveist  baiJleis  and  counsell  of  this  bru'  and  to 
ye  sessioun  for  impeading  and  staying  yrof  and  this  to  be  done  as  the  deacon 
conveaner  sail  geive  noteice. 

The  sd  day  Johne  Auldcorne  tailzC  is  admittit  as  ane  of  the  sa.x.  puire  Auidcorne 
men  to  be  susteanit  in  the  hous  and  the  collector  to  pay  him  for  the  last  Lambes  hosp'itaii."^  ^^ 
qrter. 

Vigesimo  tertio  Augustj  1647. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacone  conveaner  with  the  haill  tliretteine  deacones  of  No  courtis 
craftis  (except   Mathow  Colquhoune  deacone  of  wreichts  and    Johne    Bar  '°        ' 
deacone  of  skinneris  quha  war  closed  vpe  and  Johne  Wallace  visitor  of  maltmen) 
and  sundrie  vthers  of  thair  counsell  being  conveaneit  they  all  in  ane  voyce 
did  statut  and  ordaine  that  nae  deacones  of  craftis  sail  keipe  or  hold  courtis 
heirefter  in  any  of  ye  kirks  within  this  bru'  as  hes  beine  vseit  heirtofore  for 
eschewing  of  abuis  y''in  wnder  the  payne  of  fywe  pundis  toties  qiwties  to  be 
payit  be  ye  deacones  of  ye  craft  contraveaneris  to  ye  deacone  conveaner  for 
ye  tyme  and  siklyk  that  everie  deacone  bring  thair  quarter  compts  quarterlie  Quarter 
to  the  hospitall  and  pay  ye  same  to  ye  deacone  conveaners  collector  for  ye  vse 
of  ye  puire  and  not  cast  the  payment  yrof  over  on  thair  collectors  as  hes  beine 
done  heirtofoir  wnder  ye  sd  payne  of  fywe  pundis  to  be  payit  be  ilk  deacone 
contraveiners  heirof  toties  quoties. 

The  foirsaid  deacone  conveaner  deacones  of  craftis  and  vyrs  of  thair  Gildrieh-ne. 
counsell  conveaned  for  ye  tyme  for  many  and  sundrie  wechtie  reasounes  and 
considera~unes  moveing  them  doe  accept  fra  Alexander  Jamphray  pnt  deacone 
of  ye  heinermen  the  sowme  of  fourtie  pundis  money  and  ordaines  thair  col- 
lector to  receawe  the  same  in  satisfactioun  of  his  haUl  gilderie  fyne  and  leist 
at  ony  tyme  heirefter  ony  persoune  sould  presuime  to  seik  any  kynd  of  miti- 
ga'une  of  the  gildbroyr  fyne  dew  to  be  payit  to  ye  craftis  hospitall  for  ye  vse 
of  ye  puire  yrine  it  is  heirby  statut  and  ordaineit  be  the  said  deacone  conveaner 
deacones  of  craftis  and  vyrs  of  yair  counsell  pnt  that  thair  sail  be  no  miti- 
ga'une  yrof  granttit  to  them  wpone  any  pretext  qtsomewer  bot  all  enterand 
gildbroy"'  heirefter  to  pay  ye  full  fyne  without  diminutioune  or  modifica-une 
conforme  to  the  act  sett  downe  yranent  be  the  proveist  bailleis  and  counsell 
of  yis  bru',  naither  sail  it  be  lisume  to  the  pnt  deacone  conveaner  nor  nae 
vyrs  his  successors  in  office  to  put  in  voyceing  that  matter  heirefter  anent  the 
downe  gewing  of  any  of  ye  said  gilderie  fyne  and  quhatewer  deacone  conveaner 
sail  put  that  mater  in  voyceing  heirefter  sail  fra  then  furth  be  declareit  as 
uncapable  and  not  worthie  to  beir  office  as  deacone  conveaner  or  any  vyr 
place  among  the  crafts  of  yis  bru*. 


254  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1647 

Musquetts.  The  sd  day  Johne  Wallace  visitor  of  maltmen  and  James  Dougall  for  ye 

gairneris  gave  in  thair  musquettis. 

Memorandum.  Thair  wantis  onlie  Johne  Miller  tailzCs  for  the  zeir  1646  and  Johne  Bar 

deacone  of  skinneris  for  this  pnt  zeir. 

Warrand.  The  said  [day]  ordaines  ye  collector  to  pay  to  Claud  Spreule  saxteine 

pundis  to  helpe  to  buy  cloathes  to  him  and  ordaines  ye  said  collector  to  geive 
bak  to  Ritchard  Flaikfeild  his  band  of  thrie  scoir  pundis  awand  be  him  and 
his  caur  to  the  hospitall  and  yat  for  many  and  wechtie  causs  known  to  them 
wpon  ye  pairt  of  ye  said  Ritchard  FlaikfeUd  and  ordaines  ye  sd  collector  to 
deburs  twentie  merks  to  ye  deacone  of  the  cordonars  to  helpe  to  bind  (  ) 

Sword  lau"  sone  to  vmq"  Alex''  Sword  to  ane  craft. 

Non  to  be  The  sd  day  it  is  inactit  statuit  and  ordainet  vnanimouslie  be  the  haill 

deacone  of  his    .  ^         ■    .  ,  ,  , 

craft  \Tiless  he  deacones  of  craftis  and  vyrs  present  that  nae  maner  of  persoune  or  persounes 
egidbrother.  g^j|  ^^^  office  as  deacon  of  any  craft  within  this  bru'  naither  put  on  lyte  to 
be  voyceit  to  beir  office  as  deacone  of  the  craft  heirefter  bot  suche  as  ar  gild- 
broy''  within  ye  samyne  conforme  to  old  actis  set  downe  yanent. 

Prima  Odohris  1647. 

^'ire.  The  sd  day  the  deikine  conveiner  with  the  haill  deikines  of  craftis  being 

conveinit  in  thair  hospitall  except  the  deikins  of  chirurgeounes  and  visitor 
of  maltmen  who  war  absent  the  saids  deikines  desyrit  to  vnderstand  be  the 
said  deikine  conveiner  the  caus  of  the  meitting  who  declareit  that  Robert 
Muire  wreight  had  beine  compleining  to  him  anent  ane  act  sett  downe  against 
him  in  thair  craftis  bulk  and  desyrit  the  samyne  micht  be  removit  and  takin 
out  of  the  way.  The  sd  Robert  being  callit  vpone  compeirit  as  also  the 
brethreen  of  the  said  craft  in  ane  frequent  number.  The  said  Robert  Muir 
was  des}-rit  to  geive  in  ane  bill  gif  he  had  ony  thing  to  say  wha  refuisit  to  doe 
the  same  bot  said  he  wald  geive  in  reasounes  be  word  qrfor  the  said  act  sould 
be  removit  and  yrfore  first  alledgit  that  it  aucht  to  be  anullit  first  becaus  at 
ye  downe  setting  yof  he  maid  appella-unes  to  the  deikine  conveiner  and 
deacones  of  crafts  for  the  tyme  zet  notwithstanding  the  deacone  for  the  tyme 
and  the  craft  did  proceid  in  downe  setting  of  ye  sd  act  againes  him  and 
secoundlie  that  mater  was  yrefter  agitated  befoir  the  deacone  conveiner  and 
deacones  of  craftis  for  the  tyme  and  ane  reference  maid  yanent  to  four  honest 
men  at  quhilk  tyme  he  consignit  fywe  pundis  of  vnlaw  quhilk  aucht  to  be 
repayit  bak  again  to  him,  and  ye  said  Robert  Muir  with  the  haill  brethreen  of 
ye  sd  voca'une  of  ye  WTeichts  being  all  removit  out  of  the  said  hospitall  the 
sd  deakin  conveiner  and  haill  deikines  of  craftis  pnt  efter  resoning  declares 
that  the  sd  Robert  aucht  not  to  be  hard  anent  the  removeing  and  taking  away 
of  ye  sd  act  sett  downe  be  his  craft  againes  him  bot  that  ye  samyne  sould  and 


1647]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  255 

aucht  stand  of  full  force  ay  and  q"  he  did  supplicat  the  deikine  conveiner  and 
deikines  of  crafts  for  removing  yrof  at  qlk  tyme  they  promeis  to  goe  about  for 
doeing  yrof  and  sail  stryve  to  geive  satisfactioune  bothe  to  him  and  his  craft 
yranent,  and  againe  the  sds  deikines  being  informeit  that  thair  did  aryse  some 
contraversie  betwix  Mathow  Colquhoune  lait  deikin  of  wreichts  and  the  said 
Robert  Muir  at  ye  tyme  of  the  electioun  of  thair  deikine  wpon  the  twentie 
four  of  Septeber  last  qlk  mater  being  swa  fallin  out  betwix  ane  deikine  and  a 
broy""  in  craft  at  sik  a  tyme  they  thoucht  it  was  incumbent  to  them  to  try  out 
and  to  signifie  the  same  to  the  magistrats  to  the  effect  that  ordC  micht  be 
takin  yrwith  be  them  againes  the  offender  according  to  thair  demereits  and 
jTfore  desyrit  the  sd  Robert  Muir  to  declair  ye  maner  to  them  how  it  was  and 
ye  witness  wha  saw  ye  same  wha  anserit  he  was  not  to  complein  yvpon  at 
that  tyme  bot  that  Robert  Reid  zounger  and  Johne  Selkrig  wreichts  could 
report  the  samyne  at  lenthe,  and  the  haill  brethreen  of  the  sd  craft  with  ye  sd 
Robert  Muir  being  all  removit  againe  out  of  the  sd  hous  the  sdis  twa  witness 
war  callit  in  vpon  the  ane  efter  the  vyr  quha  baithe  of  them  declareit  that  the  day 
aforesaid  Mathow  Colquhoune  lait  deikin  of  wreichts  and  his  brethren  of  calling 
being  convenit  for  electing  of  yair  deikin  in  the  sd  hospitall  so  soone  as  the 
said  Mathow  did  sitt  downe  at  the  buird  held  in  the  chalmber  in  the  southe 
end  of  ye  sd  hospitall  the  sd  Robert  Muir  came  and  satt  downe  on  the  end  of 
ye  furme  nerrest  the  buirdheid  at  qlk  tyme  ye  sd  Mathow  desyrit  the  sd  Robert 
to  rys  out  of  yat  quhill  the  qrter  maisters  of  the  craft  war  sett  downe  first  wha 
stubbornlie  refuisit  to  geive  obedience  and  then  the  sd  Mathow  tuik  him  by 
the  cleuk  and  moveit  him  to  goe  vp  anoyr  furme  and  becaus  the  haill  deikines 
of  crafts  finds  that  it  was  not  the  pairt  of  the  sd  Robert  Muir  to  have  sittin 
downe  in  that  place  q"  the  qrter  m^s  had  been  first  sett  downe  as  the  custome 
is  in  all  vy''  crafts  and  that  he  refuiseit  to  ryse  againe  being  requyrit  thair  was 
no  fault  done  to  redact  him  to  ordour  and  yrfor  wills  and  desyrs  the  sd  deikin 
conveiner  and  suche  of  thair  number  as  he  sail  requyre  to  goe  to  the  proveist 
and  baillees  and  thair  in  all  humilitie  to  shaw  them  this  yr  diligence  for  remove- 
ing  of  all  mistaks  out  of  the  way  and  that  the  veritie  in  everie  thing  may  be 
known. 

13  October  1647. 

The  sd  day  David  Boyd  sone  naturall  to  Robert  Boyd  tailzour  is  buikit  Prenteis 
heirin  prenteis  with  his  sd  father  dureing  seivin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and    twa     °^  ' 
zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  conform  to  ye  indentor  daittit  ye  saxt  of  August  1641. 

The  same  day  Thomas  Scott  deikin  conveiner  and  deacones  of  crafts  of 
this  bru'  and  yair  counsell  being  convenit  for  electing  twa  of  thair  number 
to  be  pnttit  with  ye  sd  deikin  conveiner  to  the  proveest  baillees  and  counsell 
of  this  bru*  that  ane  of  them  might  be  elected  deikine  conveiner  for  ye  zeir 
to  come  be  pluralitie  of  voitts  Willia  Neilsoune  and  Manasses  Lyill  war  electit 
to  yat  effect  and  ordainit  to  be  pnttit  be  James  Duncane. 


256 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1647 


The  sd  day  forsd  the  sd  Thomas  Scott  being  contenit  deikine  conveaner 
the  persounes  after  mentionat  war  electit  to  be  on  his  and  ye  deacones  of 
craftis  counsell. 


James  Duncane 
David  Scheirer 
Johne  Wallace 
Johne  Scot 
Johne  Baird 
John  Stewart  elder 


Daniel  Browne 
Archibald  Sempill 
Robert  Bell 
George  Broome 
Johne  Auldcorne 
Johne  Young 
Gawin  Nesmithe 
Robert  Hutchisoune 


Williame  Lightbodie  bailzie 


Alex'  Jafray  zounger 
Hendrie  Robisoune 
Thomas  Hendersoune 
Robert  Wilsoune 
William  Birrell 

Robert  Horner 
Johne  Miller 
Johne  Briscat 
William  Miller 
Robert  Fairlie 


Ritchard  Allane 
Johne  Wilsoune 
Ro'  Hoggiszaird 
William  Cottis 
Johne  Caldwall 

Johne  Hutchisoune 
Johne  Buchannan 

Patrik  Clark 
Johne  Falcouner 
Johne  Patersoune 


Johne  Boyd 
Robert  Caldwall 


William  Neilsoune 
Walter  Bryce 
Ninian  Gilhagie 
Johne  Wallace 
Johne  Gilhagie 

James  Colquhoune 
Mathow  Colquhoune 
Johne  Cors 


Alex''  Colquhoune 
David  Boyd 
Alex''  Holmes 


Manasses  Lyill 
Johne  Bar 

Georg  Lyoun 
Willia  ScheUls 

Patrik  Brounsyd 
James  Broune 
George  Findlay 
George  Muire 
Johne  'VVoddrow 


1647]         RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  357 

14  of  October  1647. 

The  sd  day  it  is  inactit  statuit  and  ordaineit  be  ye  deiliin  conveincr  deikines  Old  deikines 
of  crafts  and  thair  haill  brethreen  of  counsell  that  the  kit  deikin  of  every  craft  <=o"nseUo's. 
sail  be  ane  ordinar  counseller  to  ye  deikin  conveiner  and  deikines  of  craftis 
the  zeir  ensewing  his  office  as  deikine  and  it  sail  not  be  in  ye  power  of  ye  pnt 
deikine  of  ye  craft  to  remove  him  yrfra  scing  it  is  fund  that  sundric  hes  done 
ye  Ij'k  this  zeir  and  of  bcfoir  vvpon  splaine  and  malice. 

The  same  day  the  dcacoiie  conveiner  and  deikines  of  craftis  did  elect  the  Four  men  on 
persounes  fallowing  to  be  the  four  men  of  thair  number  to  sitt  vpone  the  deane  gfids'^counseil. 
of    gilds    counsell  the  zeir   fallowing  viz  Willia  Neilsoune  Niniane  Gilhagie 
Manasses  Lyill  and  Johne  Auldcorne  and  ordaines  the  deikine  conveiner  to 
present  them  to  y'  effect. 

Quinto  Novembris  1647. 

The  qlk  day  William  Miller  tailzo''  be  pluralitie  of  voitts  is  electit  colecto''  Miller  colecto'. 
to  ye  hous  for  ye  zeir  to  come  quha  being  pnt  accepttit  ye  sd  office  in  and 
vpon  him  and  gave  his  aithe  as  vs  is. 

The  day  foirsd  Johnc  Briscatt  lait  colecto''  maid  his  compt  of  ye  haill 
rents  and  dewtees  vpliftit  be  him  belonging  to  the  hospitall  the  zeir  preceiding 
qrof  charge  and  dischairge  fallowes  and  first  the 

Chairge. 

In  the  first  the  comptar  chairges  himselfe  with  that  qlk  was  restand  in  his  Compt 
hands  at  ye  making  of  ye  last  compt  extending  to         xi.x  I1  xvij  s.  iiij  d.  ^'^^<=^"- 

Item  receavit  fra  Johne  Baird  for  his  gildrie  fyne  conforme  to  the  deikin  con- 
vener and  deikenes  warrand    .....  xxx  li 

Ite  receavit  fra  Ninian  Gilhagie  of  the  thrie  hundrethe  merkis  he  gatt  aff  the 
tobacco  schip  came  in  qrof  four  scoir  pundis  was  debursit  befoir  for  putting 
four  prenteiss  to  crafts 

Ite  receavit  for  ye  mortclothes 

Ite  receavit  fra  the  haill  deikines  for  y""  qrter  compt 

Ite  receavit  fra  the  litsteris 

Ite  receavit  fra  the  gairners 

Ite  receavit  fra  Ale.x""  Jafray  for  his  gildrie  fynes  . 

Ite  receavit  fra  Johne  Neisbit  for  thrie  zeirs  arent  preceiding  Mertimes  1646 
of  ye  fywe  hundreth  pundis  was  awand  be  his  father  .  j^xx  li 

Ite  receavit  fra  Charles  Pollock  for  ye  auall  of  twa  hundreth  pundis  fra 
Mtimes  1645  to  Mertimes  1646  ....  xvj  ll 

Item  receavit  fra  James  Scheills  couper  for  ye  auall  of  ane  hundrethe  merks 
ye  sd  zeir        .  .  .  .  .  .       v  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

R 


. 

j'^.xx  li 

XX.X  s. 

j'^lxxxxix  li 

viH 

viij  s 

.  iiij  d. 

iij  "li 

vij  s. 

viij  d. 
xlli 

258  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1647 

Mair  receavit  fra  Jannes  Smith  for  the  tak  dewtie  of  his  land  fra  Witsonday 

1646  to  Mertimes  1646  ....    xiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  receavit  fra  Robert  Findlay  for  the  auall  of  ane  hundrethe  pundis  fra 

Mertimes  1645  ^o  Mtimes  1646  ....  viij  ll 

Ite  receavit  fra  Johne  Buchannan  for  the  arent  of  fyve  hundreth  merkis  fra 

Lambes  1644  zeirs  to  Lambes  1646  zeirs  the  retentioune  being  rebeattit 

x\ix  ll  j  s.  viij  d. 
Ite  receavit   fra  Georg   Lyoune   for  the  arent  of   thrie  hundrethe  punds  fra 

Candilmes  1646  to  Candilmes  1647      ....        xxiiij  ti 
Item  receavit  fra  ye  Laird  of  OverpoUok  for  ye  arent  of  v^  li  thrie  termes  viz 

Witsonday  and  Mertimes  1646  and  Witsonday  1647  the  retentioune  being 

reheated  .  .  .  .  .  .  Ill    xv  s.  vj  d. 

Ite  receavit  fra  James  Peadie  Thomas  Scott  and  W"  Wilsone  for  the  arent 

of  vi<^  merks  fra  ye  19  of  Sep''  1645  to  ye  19  of  Sepf  1646  xxxij  ll 

Ite  receavit  fra  Johne  Miller  for  the  arent  of  four  hundrethe  merkis  fra  3'e 

first  of  October  1645  to  3'e  first  of  October  1646  xxj  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  receavit  fra  Johne  Comyng  for  ye  arent  of  v''  merks  fra  ye  13  of  OctC  1645 

to  3'e  13  of  Octo'  1646  .  .  .  xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  Mathow  Wilsone  for  the  arent  of  ij<=  merks  fra  ye  first  of 

October  1645  to  ye  first  of  Octo^  1646  .  .       x  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  Ro*  Hoggiszaird  for  ye  auall  of  ij^  merks  fra  ye  27  of  Sep'' 

1645  to  ye  27  of  Sep''  1646      .  .  .  .      x  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  Johne  Wilsoune  elder  tanner  for  ye  arent  of  ij<^  li  fra  the 

first  of  October  1645  t°  Y^  ^^^t  of  October  1646  .  .  xvj  li 

Ite  receavit  fra  Johne  Adame  mcha'  for  ye  auall  of  ijc  merks  fra  ye  first  of 

October  1645  ^o  ye  first  of  October  1646         .  .      x  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  the  Laird  of  Elderslie  for  four  zeirs  arent  of  fyve  hundreth 

merkis  preceiding  Mertimes  1646  the  retentioune  being  rebaitted  (  ) 

Suma  of  ye  haill  chairge  is    .  .  .      ix<=xxxiij  ti  vj  d. 


Dischairge. 

In  ye  first  the  compter  exoneris  himself  of  yat  qlk  he  debursit  to  ye  sax  poore 
men  in  the  hous  viz  ilk  ane  of  yame  xlviij  li  be  zeir  and  thair  was  halfe 
ane  quarter  vnpayit  be  ye  deceis  of  ane     inde  .  ij<=lxxxij  ll 

Item  debursit  to  3'e  four  pentioneris  .  •  •      Iiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  debursit  for  dressing  ye  musketts  and  oyle  to  them     xlvj  li  v  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  debursit  to  Niniane  Gilhagie  conforme  to  his  warrand  for  dressing  of  ye 
hospitall  and  vy''  particulars  .  .  •        xiij  ll  j  s.  vj  d. 

Item  for  dressing  the  palzeoun  and  stenting  of  it  .  .  ■  iij  li 

Ite  debursit  to  ye  colledg  colecto"'  for  four  zeirs  of  ye  bursars  burdeine 

ijt^lxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 


1647]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  259 

Ite  debursit  for  saxteine  ellis  and  a  quarter  of  claith  at  xlvj  s.  viij  d.  ye  ell 

to  be  four  stand  of  claiths  to  ye  poore  in  ye  hous    inde 

xxxvij  li  xviij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  for  xlvj  ells  thrie  qrters  gaine  kecklines  to  be  sarks  scheitts  and  lyneings 

to  ye  claiths  at  viij  s.  viij  d.  ye  ell      .  .  .  xx  ti  v  s.  ij  d. 

Ite  for  the  making  of  four  stand  of  claithes  and  the  scheitts       .  v  i 

Ite  debursit  to  M^  Ar''  Lome  for  calling  of  Bothuallhauches  band  in  ye  con- 

sistorie  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ix  s. 

Item  debursit  to  Johne  Currees  wyf  q"  schoe  buried  hir  husband  Iv  s. 

Item  to  ye  dark  for  his  fie  .  .  .  .  .  xx  tl 

Item  for  ane  kist  and  winowing  sheit  to  Johne  Currie         iij  ti  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Ite  geivin  to  James  Lindsay  officer  at  comand  of  Niniane  Gilhagie  bailzie 

for  warneing  ye  deikine  conveiners  counsell     .  .  .  xij  s. 

Ite  for  ane  kist  and  winowing  sheit  to  Gawin  Lies  .  .      v  ti  vj  s. 

Item  for  fyve  pair  of  schoone  to  the  poore  men  in  ye  hous  at  36  s.  the  pair  ix  li 
Item  to  Claud  Spreule  conforme  to  ye  warrand  to  buy  claiths  xvj  li 

Ite  for  wyne  and  vy^  particularis  furneist  q''  ye  seasing  was  takine  of  ye  zaird 

mortifeit  be  James  Stewart  proveist  to  ye  hospitall    .  .  vj  ll 

Ite  geivin  to  Willia  Zair  for  wryting  of  James  Stewarts  double  of  ye  contract 

and  ye  hospitalls  double  w'  ye  seasing  and  to  his  man  of  drink  silver 

vj  ll  xij  s. 
Item  debursit  to  Johne  Sword  sone  to  Alex''  Sword  to  helpe  to  put  him  to  ane 

craft    ......  xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  to  Johne  Neill  q°  his  bairnes  was  on  ye  Muir  vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  for  coalls  peitts  and  strae  to  ye  hospitall  .  xiij  ll  x  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  givin  to  severall  poor  folks  conforme  to  severall  warrands  at  sindrie 

meittings         ....  ji^lxxxxviij  ll  viij  s.  viij  d. 

Mair  since  ye  wrytting  for  coalls    .....  xij  s. 

Suma  of  the  dischairge  is       .  .  j^Jxxx  li  viij  s.  viij  d. 

And  swa  chairge  and  dischairge  being  calculat  thair  rests  awand 
in  to  the  compter  .  .  .  Ixxxxvij  ll  viij  s.  ij  d. 

The  said  day  Barbara  Boyds  band  of  ane  hundreth  merks  qlk  was  payable  Boyds  band 
at  Lambes  1644  and  the  haill  arents  ar  awand  sensyne  is  lent  out  to  Ritchard  ^'^*'"  °"' 
Allane  and  he  faithfull  promises  and  vndertakes  aither  to  report  ye  samyne 
or  then  to  pay  the  haill  prinll  sowme  with  the  bygane  arents. 

The  sd  day  Johne  Briscat  lait  colecto''  produceit  vmq"  Maclom  Craw-  Bands 
furds  band  and  the  clerk  produceit  Johne  Loves  band  with  Johne  Wallace  P''°''""=^"- 
band  deikine  of  ye  cordoners  of  ane  hundreth  punds  and  Willia  Birrells  band 
of  threttie  pundis  qlks  with  the  coUedge  dischairge  for  the  bursars  burdein 
ar  all  put  in  the  box. 


26o 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1647 


Muskett 
Rivin  in. 


Bursar 
Buchannan. 


Prenteis 
Hadden. 


Money  givine 
to  the 

collecto'. 


Collector  for 
ane  reir. 


Bandis  givine 
out. 


Warraiid. 


Prenteis  Alex'. 


The  sd  day  Johne  Bar  lait  deikine  of  the  skinners  produceit  his  muskett 
with  the  bandileirs  qlk  ar  put  vpe  with  ye  rest. 

The  same  day  that  vacand  place  of  bursarie  in  the  Colledge  of  Glesgow 
at  the  pnta'une  of  ye  deikin  conveaner  and  deikines  of  crafts  of  ye  sd  brut 
is  givin  and  grantit  to  Gilbert  Buchannan  sone  laull  to  Johne  Buchannan  baxter 
burges  yof  dureing  the  space  of  four  zeirs  furthe  and  fra  Michelmes  last  and 
wills  and  desyrs  the  prifill  and  regents  of  ye  sd  colledge  to  admitt  him  yto. 

Octavo  Novcinbris  1647. 
The  sd  day  James  Hadden  sone  laull  to  vmq"  M''  Johne  Hadden  minister 
at  Strathband  is  buikit  heirin  prentees  w'  Robert  Findlay  zounger  cordoner 
dureing  ye  space  of  seivine  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  servand  conform  to  ye  indento'' 
daittit  ye  18  of  Octo''  last. 

Dccimo  qtiinlo  Novcmbris. 
The  sd  day  Johne  Wilsoune  zo""  cordoner  producit  the  money  he  gat  ye 
last  zeir  frae  ye  burgess  and  gildbrether  extending  to  fourtie  thrie  pundis 
X  s.  viij  d.  and  Willianie  Reid  produceit  the  money  conteanit  in  ye  rentall 
(himself  being  payit  yrfore  for  colecting  yrof)  extending  to  fiftie  ane  pundis 
money  and  the  colector  granted  he  had  in  his  hand  15  ryells  extending  to 
fourtie  twa  pundis  qlk  he  receavit  fra  Manasses  Lyill  and  John  Miller  for  thes 
Frenchmen  who  brocht  in  tobacco  qlk  haill  thrie  somes  extendg  to  ane  hundreth 
threttie  sax  pundis  x  s.  war  all  delyverit  to  ye  colector  out  of  ye  qlks  he  pnthe 
delyverit  to  Johne  Briscat  laite  colector  that  was  restand  awin  to  him  at  ye 
making  of  his  last  compt  four  scoir  seivinteine  pundis  xviij  s.  ij  d.  with  ten 
pundis  for  his  extraordinar  paynes  as  colector  twa  zeirs  and  for  advancing 
of  moey  and  swa  thair  restis  in  ye  colectors  handis  for  qlk  he  is  to  be  chairgit 
twentie  nyne  pimdis  x  s. 

The  sd  day  it  is  statute  and  ordeanit  that  the  colectoris  heireftir  sail  be 
onlie  chosine  for  ane  zeir  and  to  burdeinit  no  farder  and  to  get  no  allowance 
for  yr  panes. 

The  sd  day  the  colector  hes  gottine  out  Gawane  Neisbittis  band  to  be 
renewit  as  also  James  Watsounes  band  Johne  Woddrowis  band  to  be  regrat 
and  JIacolm  Crawfuirds  band  to  be  regrat. 

The  sd  day  ordaines  the  colector  to  pay  to  Johne  Gillespie  tailzour  ten 
merks  to  helpe  his  brother  sone  to  ane  craft. 

Dccimo  octavo  Dccembris  1647. 
The  sd  day  Macolme  Ale.x"'  sone  laull  to  Thomas  Alexander  in  Shettilstoune 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Johne  Baird  deikin  of  wifars  to  serve  him  seavin 
zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  fra  his  entrie  qlk  was  at  Mertimes 
last  conformc  to  the  indento""  of  ye  dait  of  yir  pntis. 


Gilrao". 


1648]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  261 

Sccitndo  Fcbrij  1648. 
The  sd  day  RolDcit  Gilmour  lau"  brother  to  Williame  Gilmour  in  Over-  Prenteis 
damhe  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Johne  Clark  weifar  as  als  WilHam  Gilmour 
sone  lau"  to  the  sd  Williame  Gilmour  is  buikit  prenteis  with  Walter  Stewart 
wifar  and  that  during  seavine  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and 
fie  conforme  to  ye  twa  indentoi's  of  ye  dait  of  thir  pntis. 

Decimo  octavo  Februarij  1648. 
The  qlk  day  Thomas  Scott  deikine  conveiner  and  remanent  deikines  of  Bursarie. 
crafts  within  ye  said  brut  and  vyrs  of  thair  counsall  being  conveanit  quha 
takeand  to  thair  considera~une  that  wpon  ye  fyft  day  of  Nove''  last  bypast 
they  had  granted  ane  pnta-une  to  Gilbert  Buchannan  sone  lauU  to  Johne 
Buchannan  baxter  burges  of  this  brut  to  that  vacand  place  of  bursarie  within 
the  \'niversitie  of  Glasgow  at  thair  gift  and  pnta'une  and  being  informt  that 
ye  sd  Gilbert  had  slichtit  and  left  the  samyne  they  yrfore  for  divers  guid 
reesounes  and  consideratiounes  moving  them  doe  heirby  noiat  and  pnt 
George  Lourie  sone  lauU  to  David  Lourie  burges  of  ye  sd  brut  to  ye  forsd 
vacand  place  of  bursarie  and  that  quhill  Michellmes  nixt  to  come  allanerlie 
and  does  heirby  will  and  desyre  the  prifiU  and  regentis  of  ye  said  vniversitie 
to  admit  and  receave  him  yrto  during  ye  sd  space. 

Octavo  Maij  1648. 
The  sd  day  William  Merschell  sone  lau"  to  John  Merschell  in  Culzeoun  Prenteis 
of  Eister  Kilsythe  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Johne  Jafrae  hemerman  dureing 
ye  space  of  fywe  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  lie  conforme  to 
ye  indentor  sett  downe  yranent  of  ye  dait  the  saxt  day  of  Maij  1646  zeirs. 

Duodecimo  Maij  1648. 
The  said  day  Johne  Miller  late  deikin  of  tailzo''s  gave  in  his  musket  and  Muskett. 
bandileirs  qlk  sould  have  beine  givin  in  the  last  zeir. 

The   same  day  ordaines  the  deikines  of  hemermen    tailzCs    cordoners  Muskatts. 
coupers  visitor  of  maltmen  and  deikin  of  bonnatmakers  to  bring   in    thair 
muskatts  and  bandileirs  on  the  saxteine  day  of  Junij  nixt  ilk  ane  wnder  the 
payne  of  fyve  pundis  besyde  the  delyverie  of  them. 

Decimo  nono  Junij  1648. 
The  quhilk  day  forsameikle  as  thair  is  ane  change  maid  of  ye  proveist  Lyte  deikin 
bailees  counsell  and  vyr  office  beareris  within  this  brut  conforme  to  ane  late 
act  of  parUament  and  the  magistratis  and  counsall  being  alreadie  electit  and 
having  ordanit  ane  lyte  to  be  geivin  in  to  them  be  the  lait  deikine  conveaner 
and  deikines  of  crafts  upone  Wadnesday  to  the  effect  that  out  yrof  ane  micht 
be  chosine  deikine  conveaner  till  Michelmes  nixt  be  pluralitie  of  vottis  thir 


convemer. 


262 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1648 


persones  fallowing  viz  Manasses  Lyill  James  Colquhoune  Johne  Auldcorne 
war  put  on  lyte  to  ye  effect  and  ordaines  yem  to  be  pnted  to  ye  sds  proveist 
bailees  and  counsell. 

The  said  day  the  befoir  nameit  Manasses  Lyill  being  electit  deikine  con- 
veaner  did  continow  the  haill  old  counsall  except  he  changeit  W'"  Neilsoune 
for  WilUam  Ly'bodie  and  eikit  Walter  Neilsoune  to  ye  number  of  ye  maltmen 
as  also  changed  Thomas  Scott  laite  deikin  conveinar  for  Johne  Hutchisoune 
and  patt  Androw  Love  skinner  in  place  of  himself  Manasses  Lyill. 

Decimo  nono  Septembris  1648. 
Reid  prenteis.  The  said  day  George  Reid  sone  lau"  to  WiUiam  Reid  workman  indweller 

in  Glasgow  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Johne  Pettigrew  couper  burges  of  this 
brut  dureing  the  space  of  seavine  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for  meitt  and 
fie  conforme  to  the  indentor  daittit  the  xxj  day  of  Deceber  last  was. 


Warrand. 


Dekine 
convenar. 


Vigesimo  octavo  Septemhris  1648. 
The  qlk  day  conveanit  in  the  craftis  hospitall  Williame  Neilsoune  bailzie 
Manasses  Lyill  deikine  conveaner  with  the  deikines  of  hemermen  tailzo^'s 
skinners  wreichts  coupers  maissounes  chirurgeounes  and  bonnatmakers  Alex'' 
Parker  for  the  litsters  and  Johne  Woddrow  for  the  gairdneris  wpone  occasioune 
of  ane  supplica'une  geivine  in  befoir  them  be  Johne  Andersoune  tanner  laite 
bailhe  Walter  Neilsoune  maltman  Johne  Wilsoune  zounger  cordoner  schewing 
that  about  (  )  zeirs  since  or  yrby  they  war  imployit  be  the  dikin 

conveanar  and  deikines  of  craftis  for  the  tyme  to  ryde  to  Sainct  Androis  to 
the  parlia*  haldin  yrat  in  name  of  the  haill  craftis  anent  the  setling  of  the 
magistracie  of  this  brut  qr  they  did  remaine  and  attend  yr  with  yr  horses  in 
the  cold  of  winter  nynteine  dayes  incluiding  the  tyme  of  yr  goeing  and  comeing 
yrintill  and  that  as  zett  they  had  gottine  no  kynd  of  satisfactioune  for  yr 
debursementis  and  chairges  qlk  was  treuhe  promeist  to  them  qlk  mater  the 
sds  persounes  haveing  takine  to  thair  considera"une  thoucht  it  verie  resonable 
that  ye  foirsdis  persounes  sould  be  in  some  maner  satisfeit  and  payit  for  yr 
chairges  and  expenssis  and  yrfore  ordanit  WiUiame  Miller  thair  colectour  to 
pay  to  ilk  ane  of  the  saids  Johne  Andersoun  Walter  Neilsoune  and  Johne 
Wilsoun  fourtie  schillings  money  for  ilk  daj'es  absence  the  space  of  the  said 
nynteine  dayes  extending  to  ane  hundrethe  and  fourteine  pundis  money. 

Vndecimo  Ociobris  1648. 
The  sd  day  Thomas  Scott  laite  deikine  conveaner  being  conveanit  in  the 
hospitall  with  the  deakines  of  craftis  and  remanent  brethreine  of  thair  counsall 
lor  electing  thrie  of  thair  number  to  be  pnted  to  the  proveist  baillees  and 
counsall  and  vthers  haveand  entres  that  out  of  them  ane  might  be  chosine 
to  be  deikine  conveaner  for  the  zeir  to  come  befor  they  proceidit  yrintill  the 


1648]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  263 

sd  Thomas  Scott  produceit  ane  mandat  sub'  be  the  proveist  and  baillees  dis- 
chargeing  him  to  put  on  lyte  or  zet  to  suffer  to  have  votte  in  ye  electioune 
suche  persounes  as  war  of  thair  counsell  quha  war  aither  magistratis  or  on 
the  laite  counsell  of  the  towne  and  war  accessorie  to  the  late  vnlau"  engadg- 
ment  conforme  to  ye  actis  of  the  comittee  of  estaites  as  he  wald  be  anserable 
vpon  his  perrell,  qrwpon  Williame  Neilsone  Johne  Wilsoune  James  Duncane 
David  Schearer  Robert  Horner  Johne  Auldcorne  Manasses  Lyill  James 
Colquhoune  wer  scoreit  out  of  hte  and  these  of  them  present  removit  out  of 
ye  hous  seeing  the}'  war  naither  to  be  lyted  nor  had  voyce  in  electioune  as 
also  they  war  removit  w'  them  Cuthbert  Greg  William  Scheills  Johne  Bar 
Patrik  Bumesyde  and  Johne  Hall  Alex""  Jafrae  Hendrie  Robisoune  Robert 
Bell  Johne  Baird  Johne  Biscat  Johne  Falcouner  Johne  Patersoune  Gawin 
Nesmythe,  and  the  rest  of  the  haill  deikines  old  and  new  and  the  brethrein 
of  thair  counsell  wha  war  pnt  went  on  to  the  sd  electioun  and  out  of  the  haill 
number  thir  thrie  persounes  war  elected  to  be  pnted  to  the  sdis  provest  baillees 
and  counsell  and  vyrs  abovewrittine  to  the  effect  forsd  viz  William  Ly'bodie 
Niniane  Gilhagie  Ro'  Hoggiszard. 

Lykas  the  same  day  the  forsd  day  the  sd  Williame  Lichtbodie  being 
elected  deikine  conveaner  conforme  to  ye  comoun  ordo"^  thir  persounes  war 
electit  and  chosine  to  be  vpon  his  counsell  and  ye  deikines  and  first  fallowes 
ye  deikines. 

Robert  Wilsoune  Johne  Wallace  maltman 

Robert  Horner  Johne  Danigzell 

Johne  Wilsoune  Alex''  Colquhoune 

Johne  Buchannan  Andrew  Love 

Patrik  Bryce  Cuthbert  Greg 

Johne  Rankeine  Patrick  Brounsyd 

Johne  Hall  Johne  Woddrow 

Piter  Johnestoune  bailUe 

James  Duncane  Williame  Neilsoune 

Hendrie  Robisone  Walter  Bryce 

Artho"^  Taketts  Niniane  Gilhagie 

James  Park  Archibald  Serapill 

Johne  Liper  Johne  Gilhagie 

David  Scherar  Robert  Bell 

Johne  Miller  James  Colquhoune 

James  Miller 
Robert  Fairlie 

Robert  Boyd  George  Broome 

Alex''  Holmes 


264 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1648 


Johne  Andersoune 
Ritchart  Allane 
Johne  Wallace 
Johne  Wilsoune  zor 
Adame  \Mlsone 


Thomas  Scott 
Johne  Scott 


Johne  Baird 
Patrik  Clerk 
Johne  Patersoune 

Johne  Stewart  elder 
Johne  Boyd 

Daniell  Browne 


Manasses  Lyill 
Johne  Auldcome 


Johne  Zoung 
Robert  Merschell 


Gawin  Nesmith 
Alexf  Parker 


James  Browne 
Robert  Hutchesoune 


Sexto  Novembris  1648. 

The  qlk  day  Wilhame  Miller  laite  colector  maid  his  compt  of  his  haill 
intromissioime  with  the  goods  and  rentis  of  the  said  hospitall  fra  Hallowmes 
1647  to  Hallo\\TOes  1648  zeirs  qrof  charge  and  dischairge  fallowes  and  first  the 

Chairge. 

Compt  Millar.  In  ve  first  the  comptar  chairges  himselfe  with  the  sowmes  fallowing  receavit 

be  him  frae  Duncane  Aikeine  for  the  aual  rent  of  twa  hundrethe  pundis 

fra  Witsonday  1645  to  Mtimes  1647  ....  x.xxv  li 
Item  receavit  frae  Ritchairt  Allane  in  name  of   Barbara  Boyd  for  3-e  arent 

of  100  merks  for  thrie  zeirs  preceiding  Lambes  1644  .  .  xv  ll 

Item  fra  ye  Countes  of  Eglingtoune  for  ye  arent  of  1000  merks  fra  ye  dait 

of  ye  band  to  Mertimes  1647  •  ■  l^vj  "li  viij  s.  viij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  M""  Niniane  Campbell   for   ye  arent  of  100  li  fra  Mertimes 

1645  to  Mtimes  1647  .....  xiiij  li  x  s. 

Item  fra  James  Smithe  for  ye  arent  of   500  merks   fra  Mtimes  1646  to  Wit- 

somiday  1648  ....  xxxij  li  xvj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  James  Blair  of  Adametoune  of  prin"  sowTne 

ji^xxxiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 
Item  fra  him  for  the  bygane  arentis  yroi  at  Mtimes  1647  ^t  qlk  tyme  the  sd 

prin"  sowme  was  payit  ....    xix  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  fra  Robert  Findlay  for  the  anuall  of  100  li  fra  Mtimes  1646  to  Mertimes 

1647  •  •  •  •  •  .       vj  H  X  s. 


1648]        RFXORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  265 

Item  receavit  fra  the  exeo''s  of  vmq"  George   Duncane  for  ye  arent  of  500 

merks  fra  the  dait  of  ye  band  to  Candilmes  1648  liij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  receavit  from  W  Johne  Dunlope  in  name  of  Hamiltoune  of  Bothuall- 

hauche  for  four  zeir  and  ane  halfes  arent  of  300  merkis  preceiding  Mertimes 

1647    ........  Ixij  li 

Item  receavit  fra  James  Scheills  couper  for  ye  arent  of  100  merks  fra  Mertimes 

1646  to  Mertimes  1647  .  .  .  iiij  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  Johne  Miller  tailzo"'  for  the  arent  of  400  merks  fra  Mertimes 

1646  to  Mertimes  1648  .  .  .  xxxiiij  li   xiij  s.   iiij  d. 

Item  receavit  fra  George  Lyoun  for  ye  arent  of  200  li  fra  Candilmes  1647  to 

Candilmes  1648  .....  xix  li  x  s. 

Item  receavit  fra  Charles  Pollock  for  ye  aual  rent  of  300  merks  fra  Witsounday 

1646  to  Witsonday  1647         •  •  •  ■  ■  xv  li 

Item  receavit  fra  Johne  Biscat  laite  collector  conforme  to  ane  act  daitit  ye  14 

of  Nov"  1647  .....  xxix  li  X  s. 

Item  receavit  fra  the  deikines  of  quarter  comptis  .  j<^lxxxxix  li 

Item  receavit  fra  ye  litsters  .  .  .  vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  fra  the  gairneris        .  .  .  .  .      iij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  receavit  for  ane  old  pan  .  .  .  .  vj  s.  vj  d. 

Item  for  mortclaithes         .  .  .  .  .  iij  li  viij  s. 

Item  receavit  frae  Androw  Lyill  for  ye  auall  of  40  ll  for  twa  zeirs  and  a  halfe 

preceiding  Mtimes  1647  .  .  .  .  .  iij  li 

Suiria  of  the  haill  charge  is   .  .  vij^lvij  li   vij  s.   6d. 


Dischairge. 

Item  the  comptar  dischairges  himself e    with    the    haill    sowmes  fallowing 

debursit  be  him  as  is  efterspeit 
And  first  to  ye  sax  poore  men  in  the  hous  dureing  the  space  of  the  said  haill 

zeir     .......  ijc'Lxxxviij  li 

Item  to  the  four  pentionars  .  .  .  liij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  debursit  to  ye  clerk      .  .  .  .  .  .  xx  li 

Item  debursit  for  ane  pan  and  boull  yrto  to  ye  poore  men         xlvij  s.  8d. 
Item  for  sax  paire  of  schoone  to  the  sax  poore  men  .  .     x  h  vj  s. 

Ite  debursit  for  regra~une  of  the  Laird  of  Elderslees  band  .  .  iiij  li 

Ite  debursit  for  geivin  ane  charge  yvpone  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Ite  for  19  ellis  of  gainhekhngs  to  ye  6  poore  men  at  gs.  8d.  ye  ell  is 

ix  li  iij  s.  viij  d. 
Ite  debursit  for  claithe  to  be  ane  cleuk  to  James  Baird     .  x  li  viij  s. 

Ite  for  ye  making  yrof       .  .  .  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Item  for  making  of  thair  sax  sarkis  .  .  .  .  xij  s. 

Item  for  ane  snek  to  ane  window  in  ye  hous  .  .  .  iiij  s. 


266  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1648 

Item  debursit  for  15  ells  of  claith  to  be  claithes  to  ye  poore  men  at  40s.  ye  ell 

inde    ........  xxx  ll 

Item  debursit  for  6  ellis  of  claith  at  45  ye  ell      inde  .  .    xiij  lI  x  s. 

Item  bocht  to  them  25  ellis  bleitcht  hardine  at  gs.  6d.  ye  ell    inde 

xj  ll  xvij  s.  vj  d. 
Item  debursit  to  Johne  Auldcorne   for  making  his  awine  claithes        xij  s. 
Ite  debursit  to  ane  casie  maker  for  mending  ane  fyre  in  ye  hous  vj  ll. 

Ite  for  seivine  dracht  sand  yrto     .  .  .  .  j  ll  xv  s. 

Ite  debursit  for  aucht  ellis  claith  to  be  ane  pair  of  scheitts  to  Andro  Gray  at 

gs.  ye  ell     inde  .  .  .  .  .  iij  li  xij  s. 

Item  for  ane  pair  of  bands  to  ye  bak  door  of  ye  hospitall  ij  li  vj  s. 

Item  to  Willis  Reid  and  James  Bischop  for  some  service  done  anent  ye  muskets 

j  H  ij  s. 
Item  to  Willia  Reid  for  goeing  thrie  tymes  out  to  Garnkirk  to  charge  M''  John 

Dunlop  for  Bothuallhauches  money     .  .  .  .  ij  li 

Item  debursit  for  ane  wining  scheit  and  kist  to  John  Auldcorne 

iiij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Ite  debursit  for  coalls  and  peitts  to  the  hous  the  haill  zeir  xviij  li  iiij  s. 

Item  debursit  for  the  suppUe  of  divers  poore  folks  at  Michelmes  court 

Ixiij  li  ix  s.  viij  d. 
Ite  debursit  to  them  at  Candilmes  court    . 
Ite  debursit  to  them  at  Beltane  court 
Ite  debursit  to  them  at  Lames  court 
Item  debursit  to  helpe  to  buy  ane  stand  of  claithes  to 

cordoner  his  sone         .... 
Item  debursit  to  WiUiam  Andersoune  cordoner  for  his  supplie 

vj  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  debursit  to  Johne  Gillespie  tailzo''  to  help  to  putt  his  brothers  sone  to 

ane  craft  .  .  .  .  .  .     vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  Johne  Andersoune  Walter  Neilsoune  and  Johne  Wilsoune  zo''  conforme 

to  the  warrand  daitit  28  of  Sep^  last  ....        j'^xiiij  li 
Item  to  Allane  Neper  for  his  supplie  .  .  .  .       v  li  x  s. 

Item  debursit  to  Androw  Lyill  for  making  of  ye  poore  folkis  claithes 

V  li  viij  s. 
Ite  debursit  to  Robert  Wilsone  deikin  of  hemermen  for  dressing  of  the  muskets 

iiij  ti 
Item  debursit  at  coinand  of  Thomas  Scott  late  deikin  conveaner  that  was  spent 

with  James  Stewart  q"  he  sold  the  half  houssis  to  ye  hospitall     xlvj  s.  viij  d. 

Suma  of  the  haill  dischairge  is  .  viij<=xiij  t  xj  s.  ij  d. 

Sua  chairge  and  dischairge  being  calculate  the  compter  is  super- 
expendit  in  ye  sowme  of  ...      Ixxx5  tl  3s.   8d. 


xxxij  li 

xiiij  s. 

.     xlH 

viij  s. 

iiij  d. 

.    lixt 

viij  s. 

iiij  d. 

vmq" 

Johne 

Scott 

vj  li 

xiij  s. 

iiij  d. 

out. 


1649]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  267 

The  qlk  compt  befoire  writtine  being  calculat  and  laid,  chairge  and  dis- 
chairge  yrine  conteanit  being  at  lenthe  red  hard  and  considerit  the  samyne 
was  allowit  ratifeit  and  approvine  in  the  haill  heids  and  articles  yrin  cyteanit 
and  ordaines  the  nixt  colector  to  be  chosine  to  mak  thankfull  pay'  to  ye  said 
Wilham  Miller  of  ye  forsd  sowme  of  Ixxxv  ti  iij  s.  viij  d.  and  yir  pnts  to  be 
his  warrand  as  also  ane  sufficient  dischairge  to  ye  sd  William  Miller. 

The  said  day  Arthour  Tacketts  saidler  is  electit  colector  to  the  hospitall  Tacketts 
for  ane  zeir  to  come  quha  being  present  accepted  and  gave  his  aithe  as  vse  is. 

The  said  day  the  clerk  and  officer  is  continowit. 

Dccimo  tertio  Novembris  164S. 
The  qlk  day  Johne  Duncane  hemerman  is  admited  and  receavit  in  the  Duncane  in 
hous  as  ane  of  the  sax  poore  men   yrin  and  ordaines  him  to  [be]  susteanit  ''°^P"^"- 
conforme  as  ye  rest  ar. 

The  same  day  Johne  Caldwalls  band  is  givin  to  ye  colector.  Band. 

Vndecimo  Decebris  1648. 
The  sd  day  the  bandis  vnderwrittine  war  takine  out  of  ye  box  and  Bands  givin 
delyverit  to  ye  collector  to  the  effect  that  he  may  speik  the  granters  yrof  for 
renewing  of  the  samyne  or  then  to  cause  regrat  ye  bandis  and  cause  chairge 
yrfore  viz  Charles  Polloks  band  conteaning  300  merks  Johne  Buchannans 
band  contening  500  merks  George  Lyones  band  conteaning  300  I1  W">  Birrells 
band  conteaning  30  li  ane  band  granted  be  Thomas  Scott  James  Padie  and 
\\m  Wilsone  conteaning  600  merks  Johne  Cumyngs  band  conteaning  500 
merks  Johne  Wilsones  band  conteanand  200  merks  Mathow  Wilsones  band 
conteanand  200  merks  Robert  Hoggiszairds  band  conteinand  200  merks  Johne 
Adames  band  conteaneand  200  merks  and  to  be  put  to  present  execu'un  the 
Laird  of  Elderislees  band  conteanand  500  merks. 

The  same  day  Johne  Auldcorne  gave  in  fyftie  twa  punds  iiij  s.  ij  d.  qlk  Moneyburgess 
he  colected  ye  last  zeir  from  the  burgess  qlk  was  delyverit  to  ye  colector  and  P''°'^"'^"- 
ordaines  him  to  be  charget  yrwith. 

The  sd  day  William  Reid  maid  compt  of  ye  moneys  conteanit  in  ye  rentall  Money 
extending  to  fiftie  sex  punds  vj  s.  viij  d.  qrof  he  gat  bak  for  his  service  fyve  '^°'^'^'^''- 
punds  vj  s.  viij  d.     Swa  rests  fiftie  ane  punds  qlk  is  delyverit  to  ye  colector 
and  ordaines  him  to  be  charget  yrwith  at  ye  [compt  making]. 

Prima  ] anuarij  1649. 
The  said  day  the  deikine  conveaner  deikines  of  crafts  and  y''  brethreine 
of  counsell  quha  for  the  maist  pairt  wer  pnt  be  pluralitie  of  vottis  Thomas 
Scott    baxter  late  deikin  conveaner  is  electit    to  sitt  on  the  deane  of    gilds 
counsall  as  ane  of  the  four  for  the  crafts  in  place  of  William  Neilsoune. 


26S 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1649 


Cordoners. 


Watsoune 
prenteis. 


Sloney  givin 
to  sessioun. 


Band 
produce!  t 
colecto'- 


Forgusone. 


Wairand. 


Bands. 


Muskets. 


The  same  day  Thomas  IngUs  being  lateUe  electit  deikin  of  ye  cordoneris  in 
place  of  Johne  W'ilsoune  he  nominal  the  persones  following  to  be  on  the 
deikine  conveaners  counsell  for  that  tred  to  the  nixt  electioune  viz  Ritchart 
AUane  Ro'  Hoggiszard  W™  Coattis  Johne  W' allace  and  Walter  M^'Alay  quha 
war  all  absent  except  ye  sd  W™  Cotts. 

The  said  daj-  Wilham  Watsoune  lau"  sone  to  vmqi'  Johne  Watsoune 
flescho"^  is  buiket  prenteis  with  Robert  Fergisoun  tailzo''  for  fyve  zeirs  and 
twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indentor  daitit  ye  last  day  of  Apryle 
last  bj'past. 

Diwdecimo  Februarij  1649. 

The  qlk  day  the  particular  deikines  of  crafts  efterspeit  wpone  ane  motioune 
maid  to  the  hous  of  befoir  be  the  ministers  for  geiving  helpe  and  supplie  to 
ye  comoun  poore  in  the  towne  in  this  hard  and  strait  tyme  gave  in  ye  par- 
ticular sowmes  of  money  fallowing  to  be  delys'erit  to  ye  ministers  and  kirk 
sessioune  for  ^-e  caus  forsaid  viz  the  deikin  of  heihermen  xx  tl  the  deikin  of 
talzo""  1  merks  the  deikin  of  cordoners  1  merks  the  visitor  of  maltmen  1  merks 
the  deikin  of  baxters  xij  ll  the  deikin  of  weivars  xx  ll  the  deikin  of  ye  maissones 
ten  punds  money  the  deikin  of  chirurgeones  vj  ll  the  deikin  of  WTichts 
(  )  the  deikin  of  ye  flescho''s  x  merks  the  deikin  of  ye  skinners 

XX  merks  the  deikin  of  coupers  xij  li  the  visitor  of  gardneris  viij  merks. 

The  sd  day  WiUia  Fergisones  band  that  was  geivin  for  his  gildrie  fyne 

is  geivine  to  ye  colector  and  he  is  to  be  chargeit  yrwith  at  his  compt. 

The  sd  day  ordaines  the  colector  to  geive  bak  to  Wilha  Fergisoune  thrie 
scoir  punds  mo<^>'  of  his  gildrie  fyne  wpon  considera^ne  that  he  did  serve  his 
brother  as  prenteis  during  ye  zeirs  of  ye  gildrie  and  svva  was  maid  burges  as 
a  prenteis  and  so  aucht  to  have  pa3dt  no  mor  for  his  gildrie  nor  ten  merks 
and  that  it  is  heirby  declaret  that  ye  former  act  sett  downe  anent  dischargeing 
of  modificatioune  to  be  geivin  for  gildrie  fynes  is  not  fringit  nor  broken  bot 
that  this  was  done  wpon  good  and  sufficient  waiTand  and  swa  ye  act  to  stand 
in  full  force. 

The  sd  dav  ordaines  ve  colector  to  pay  to  Johne  Hamiltoun  sone  to 
vmq"  Jolm  Hamiltoun  cordoner  the  sowme  of  (  )  to  help 

to  bind  him  prenteis  to  a  master. 

The  sd  day  Johne  Auldcomes  band  of  fyve  hundrethe  merkis  was  takin 
out  of  the  box  and  Johne  Bar  skinner  his  band  was  put  in  place  of  it  for  ye 
lyke  sowme. 

The  sd  day  Johne  Zoung  late  deikin  of  cowpers  David  Scheirer  late  deikine 
of  tailzo's  and  Gawin  Nesmithe  late  deikin  of  bonatmakers  gave  in  y''  musketts 
the  sd  dav. 


1649]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  269 

Vigesimo  quarto  Februarij  1649. 

The  sd  day  the  deikine  conveaner  with  Piter  Johnestoune,  bailzie,  William  Warrand 
Neilsone  with  the  deikines  of  hemermen  taiIzo''s  cordoners  weiveirs  coupers 
vvrichts  flescho''s  and  inaissounes  beeing  all  conveinet  anent  the  geiving  anser 
to  John  Wallace  cordoner  his  supplicafne  and  they  vnderstanding  his 
distressit  estate  ordaincs  y''  colector  to  geive  him  for  his  supplie  ane  hundrethe 
pundis  money  and  yir  pntis  with  his  discharge  to  be  his  warrand  and  ye  sd 
colector  is  to  be  chargit  with  ye  sd  Johne  Wallace  his  gildrie  fyne. 

Decimo  octavo  Aprilis  1649. 

The  sd  day  Walter  Buchannan  sone  lau"  to  James  Buchannan  indwellar  Prenteis 
within  this  bru'  is  buikeit  prenteis  with  Walter  Buchannan  baxter  to  serve 
him  nyne  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  servand  conforme  to  ye  indentor  daitit  ye  2 
of  Sep'  1632  zeirs. 

Septimo  Maij  1649. 

The  qlk  day  James  Grahame  weiwar  is  receavit  and  accepted  as  ane  of  Grahamc  in 
ye  sax  poore  men  in  the  hospitall  and  ordanit  to  have  the  lyk  pensioun  w^    °*'"  ^ 
ye  rest. 

The  same  day  James  Duncane  gave  in  his  musket. 

The  sd  day  the  colector  receavit  fra  William  Reid  officer  twentie  four  Money 
pundis  that  was  restand  in  his  hands  of  ye  sowmes  colected  be  ye  deikines 
for  ye  vse  of  ye  session  and  he  is  to  be  charget  ywith  at  yc  making  of   his 
compt. 

xj  Maij  1649. 

WilUam  Crawfoord  sone  lau''  to  James  Crawfoord  baxter  is  bookit  prenteis  Prenteis 
to  William  Glen  elder  baxter  dureing  seivin  zeirs  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for 
meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indentor  of  the  dait  of  thir  puts. 

28  Maij  1649. 

The  sd  day  Thomas  Scheirer  sone  to  Robert  Sheirer  in  Partick  is  buikit  Prenteis 
heirin  prenteis  with  Johne  Gibsoune  weivar  dureing  ye  space  of  seivine  zeirs 
as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  conform  to  ye  indentor  of  yc  dait 
of  yir  pnts. 

18  Junij  1649. 

The  sd  day  Thomas  Scot  sone  to  Thomas  Scott  in  Floores  of  Egleschame  Prenteis  Scot, 
is  buikit  prenteis  w'  James  Scot  armoi^er  dureing  ye  space  of  nyne  zeirs  conform 
to  ye  indento''  ye  17  of  Ja''  last. 


270 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1649 


Colecto' 
money. 


Quentance 
ia  hospitall. 


Swords  for 
muskattis. 


Musket  ts. 


Lourie 
vnlawit. 


Scool. 


Decimo  August]  1649. 

The  sd  day  thair  is  delyverit  to  the  colecto''  twentie  four  punds  qlk  was 
gottin  fra  these  q*  broght  in  the  frala  wyne  and  ordaines  him  to  be  charget 

yrwith  at  the  making  of  his  compt. 

The  sd  day  Thomas  Quentance  talzo"'  is  admited  and  receavit  as  ane  of 
ye  sax  poore  men  to  be  susteanit  in  the  hospitall  and  ordaines  the  collector 
to  pay  him  as  the  rest  furthe  and  fra  Lambes  last  and  m  tyme  comeing  dureing 
his  remaineing  y^. 

The  said  day  the  deikin  conveiner  deikins  of  crafts  and  y''  counsel!  quha 
for  ye  maist  pairt  being  present  for  many  and  good  causes  moveing  yame  it 
is  inacted  statut  and  ordanit  be  them  all  in  ane  voyce  that  everie  new  elected 
deikin  sail  giwe  in  to  ye  hospitall  in  place  and  sted  of  his  muskett  ane  sufficient 
sword  and  belt  worth  the  sowme  of  ten  merkis  money  and  that  everie  new 
electit  deikine  conveaner  the  first  zeir  of  his  electioune  sail  giwe  in  to  the  sd 
hospitall  in  place  and  sted  of  his  corslatt  ane  pick  and  sword  and  ane  belt. 

Decimo  Septembris  1649. 

The  sd  day  Robert  Wilsowne  deikin  of  the  hernermen  and  Johne  Rankeine 
deikin  of  ye  maissones  gave  in  thair  muskatts  and  bandileris  and  ordaines  the 
haill  rest  of  the  new  deikines  quha  sould  giwe  in  thairs  that  they  bring  in  the 
samyne  this  day  aucht  dayes  wnder  ye  payne  of  iyve  pimdis  by  y''  muskettis. 

The  sd  day  Thomas  Lourie  gairdner  is  vnlawit  in  the  sowme  of  twentie 
merks  money  for  the  wronging  and  injureing  of  Johne  Woddrow  visito''  of  the 
gardners  sundrie  wayes  suiiiUe  provin  befoir  the  deikin  conveiner  deikins  and 
}■'■  counsall  and  ordaines  him  to  entir  his  persoune  in  ward  in  the  tolbooth 
of  this  brugh  q"  he  pay  samj-ne  and  give  satisfactioune  for  the  sd  wrong  and 
that  the  sd  Johne  Woddrow  declair  he  hes  gottin  satisfactioun. 

Decimo  septimo  Septembris  1649. 

The  sd  day  conveaneit  the  deikin  conveaner  Piter  Jonstoun,  balzie,  WiUiam 
Neilsoune  Thomas  Scott  togither  w'  ye  deikines  of  heinermen  tailzo^'s  cor- 
doners  wrichts  chirurgeons  baxters  visitor  of  maltmen  wifars  bonatmakers 
maissones  couperis  quho  haveing  at  lenthe  advyseit  with  thair  severall  craftis 
repive  concerning  ane  motioune  maid  to  them  divers  tymes  of  befoir  anent 
the  haveing  and  settleing  of  ane  scoole  and  scoolemaster  for  instructing  of  all 
poore  childreine  quha  sail  be  put  j^rto  and  quhais  parents  ar  not  able  to  pay 
thair  scoUedge  for  instructing  of  them  haveing  the  glorie  of  God  befoir  thair 
eyes  the  educatioune  and  instructing  of  ye  sdis  poore  childreine  hes  all  in  ane 
voyce  concludeit  that  suche  ane  scoole  sail  be  and  ane  maister  to  be  provydit 
yrto  quho  sail  have  zeirhe  for  his  paynes  in  attending  the  sd  scoole  the  sowme 


1649]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


271 


of  (  )  qlk  they  ordaine  to  be  payit  zeirlie  efter  the  settleing  of  ye 

sd  scoole  and  scoolemaister  in  yis  maner  fallowing,  the  deikine  and  craft  of 
hemermen  and  his  craft  thretteine  pundis  vj  s.  viij  d.  the  deikin  of  talzo's  and 
his  craft  twentie  twa  pundis  iiij  s.  vj  d.  be  the  deikin  of  cordoners  and  his 
craft  twentie  twa  pundis  iiij  s.  vj  d.  be  the  visitor  of  maltmen  and  his  calling 
twentie  twa  pundis  iiij  s.  vj  d.  be  the  deikin  of  baxters  and  his  craft  nyne 
pundis  be  the  deikin  of  weivars  and  his  craft  twelf  pundis  be  the  deikin  of 
maissones  and  his  craft  sax  pundis  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  be  the  deikin  of  chirurgeones 
and  his  craft  four  punds  be  the  deikine  of  fieschors  and  his  craft  sax  pundis 
xiij  s.  iiij  d.  be  the  deikine  of  skynners  and  his  craft  threttein  punds  vj  s,  viij  d. 
be  the  deikine  of  coupers  and  his  craft  aught  punds  be  the  deikin  of  wrights 
and  his  craft  aught  punds  xviij  s.  be  the  deikin  of  the  bonatmakers  fourtie 
schilling  be  the  gairdners  fourtie  schilling. 

The  sd  day  the  deikine  conveaner  gave  in  his  corselatt  as  also  the  deikines  Muskatts. 
of  cordoners  wifars  chirurgeones  wrichts  gawe  in  thair  musketts  and  bandileiris. 


conveanar. 


Decimo  Odobris  1649. 

The  qlk  day  the  deikine  conveaner  deikines  of  craftis  and  brethrein  of  y^  Dekine 
counsall  being  conveanet  in  y''  hospitall  for  electing  of  twa  of  thair  number 
to  be  presented  with  Willia  Ly'bodie  pnt  deikine  conveaner  to  the  proveist 
balleis  and  counsall  of  yis  brut  and  vy^s  haveand  entres  to  the  effect  that  ane 
of  them  micht  be  chosine  to  be  deikin  conveaner  of  yis  brugh  for  the  zeir  to 
come  be  pluralitie  of  votts  Piter  Jonstoun  and  Thomas  Scott  wer  nominat  to 
be  put  on  lyte  for  the  effect  forsd. 


The  same  day  the  sd  William  Ly'bodie  being  continowit  dekine  conveanar  Ly'bodie 
the  persones  fallowing  wer  electit  to  be  on  the  counsall.  convenor. 

Dekines 


Robert  Wilsoune 
Robert  Boyd 
Walter  M<-Allae 
Johne  Scot 
Patrik  Bryce 
John  Boyd 
Andro  Muir 


Walter  Bryce 
Robert  Reid 
George  Broome 
Robert  Cumyng 
George  Lyone 
Gawin  Nesmithe 


Johne  Kirkwood 
Willia  Birrell 
Willia  Phillip 


Niniane  Gilhagie  balzie 


John  Rankein 
John  Stewart  elder 


272 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW, 


[1649 


Joline  Leiper 
Henrie  Robison 

Piter  Jonstoune 
Johne  Clerk 
W"  Knox 
John  Tennent 
Thomas  M^'Cuir 


Thomas  Inghs 
W'm  Coatts 
John  Wallace 
Robert  Hoggiszaird 
Ro*  Steine 


Thomas  Scott 
Johne  Buchannan 

Thomas  Andusone 
Johne  Booge 
Alex'  Zounger 


4  persones  to 
ye  deane  of 
gilds  counsell. 


Compt. 


Johne  Hall 

Thomas  Campbell 
Jo"  Findlay 
John  Gilhagie 
James  ^lorisone 
James  Dunlope 

Johne  DanizeD 
James  Elphistoun 

Alex''  Colquhoun 
Alex'  Holmes 

Andro  Love 
James  Peadie 

John  Zoung 
Phillen  Snype 

Andro  Jaip 

John  Wodrow 
Thomas  Lourie 

Georg  Findlay 
Alex'  Parker 


Undcciiiw  Octobris  1649. 
The  qlk  day  the  deikine  conveaner  deikines  of  craftis  and  brethrein  being 
con\eanit  in  thair  hospitall  for  electing  of  four  persones  of  y'  number  to  be 
vpon  ye  dein  of  gilds  counsall  for  the  crafts  rank  ye  zeir  ensewing  be  pluralitie 
of  votts  the  persones  fallowing  wer  nolat  to  y'  effect  viz  Piter  Johnstoun  late 
balzie  Thomas  Scott  baxter  Robert  Hoggiszaird  tanner  and  Thomas  Campbell 
maltman. 

Vigcsimo  sccundo  Octobris  1649. 

The  quhilk  day  Artho""  Taketts  late  collector  maid  his  compt  of  his  intro- 
missioune  with  the  hospitall  rents  the  tyme  of  his  intromissioune  yrwith  qlk 
was  frae  Michelmes  164S  to  Michelmes  1649  qrof  chairge  and  dischairge 
fallowes  and  iirst  the 

Chairge. 

In  the  first  ye  comptai"  chairges  himself e  with  the  sowme  fallowing  receavit 
be  him  frae  Johne  Auldcorne  of  burgess  silver  conform  to  ye  act  of  ye 
xj  of  DC  last  extending  to      .  .  .  .         lij  li  liij  s.  ij  d. 


1649]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  273 

Item  receavit  be  him  for  ye  aualls  cytcnit  in  j-c  rentall  conforme  to  the  act 

of  ye  same  dait  .  .  ■  •  •  •  Ij  li 

Mair  receavit  be  him  fra  W'"  Reid  of  ye  money  that  was  left  qch  was  colected 

for  ye  sessioune  ......        xxiiij  li 

Mair  receavit  be  ye  colector  fra  thes  q=^  brocht  in  the  phrala  wyne         xxiiij  li 
Item  receavit  fra  Thomas  Scott  of  vmq'i  Macolme  Crawfoords  arent 

xxvj  ll  xiij  s.  4d. 
Item  receavit  fra  Johne  Ncisbit    for  the  arent  of  500  li  twa  zeirs   preceiding 

Mertimes  1648  .  .  •  .  .  .  Ixv  li 

Ite  receavit  fra  the  Laird  of   Overpollok  for  ye  arent  of  vy'  500  li   fra  Wit- 

sonday  1647  to  Witsonday  1649  ....  Ixv  li 

Ite  fra  Johne  Woddrow  for  ye  arent  of  200  merks  3  zeirs  preceiding  Mtimes 

1648    ........         xxvj  li 

Ite  receavit  fra  Duncane  Aikeine  for  ye  arent  of  300  merks  fra  Mtimes  1647 

to  Mertimes  1648        ......  xiij  li 

Ite  receavit  fra  Johne  Wilsoune  elder  tanner  for  ye  arent  of  200  li  fra  Mertimes 

1646  to  Mtimes  1647  .  .  .  .  .  xiij  li 

Item  receavit  fra  M^  Ninian  Campbell  for  ye  arent  of  100  li  fra  Mtimes  1647 

to  Mtimes  1648  .  .  .  .  .  vj  li  x  s. 

Mair  receavit    fra  Thomas    Scott    James  Peadie  and  W'"  Wilsoune    for    ye 

arent  of  600  merks  twa  zeirs  preceiding  Mertimes  1648       .  lij  li 

Ite  receavit  fra  Charles  Pollok  of  prin"  sowm        .  .  .  ij^  li 

Mair  receavit  fra  him  of  bygaine  arents     ....  xxij  li 

Ite  receavit  fra  Johne  Buchannan  for  ye  arent  of  500  merks  fra  Lambes  1646 

to  Lambes  1648  .  .  .  ^  .      xliijt  vj  s.  8d. 

Ite  fra  Jo"  Ada  for  ye  arent  of  200   merks  fra  Mtimes  1646  to  Mtimes  1648 

xvij  li  6s.  8d. 
Mair  fra  James  Scheills  for  the  arent  of  100  merks  fra  Mtimes  1647  to  Mtimes 

1648    ......  .         iiij  li  vj  s.  8d. 

Ite  George  Duncane  was  awin  500  merks  qlk  was  paj-ed  in  and  300  merks  lent 

out  yof  to  Piter  Geiiiill  and  200  merks  to  Fillen  Snype  and  ye  compter 

receavit  of  bygane  arents  of  ye  same  .  .       xxj  li  xiij  s.  4d. 

Ite  receavit  fra  Johne  Bar  for  the  arent  of  500  merks  y'  was  awin  be  Johne 

Auldcorne  fra  Witsonday  1648  to  Witsonday  1649  xxj  li  xiij  s.  4d. 

Ite  receavit  fra  ye  Laird  of  Elderslie  for  ye  arent  of  500  merks  twa  zeirs  and 

ane  halfe  preceiding  Witsounday  1649  .  .  Hiij  li   4s.   8d. 

Ite  receavit  fra  Johne  Cumyng  for  the  arent  of  500  merks  preceiding  Mtimes 

1648  qrof  ye  first  at  8  of  ye  hundreth  and  ye  vy^  at  4  li  6s.  8d.  a  hundreth 

xlviij  li  6s.  8d. 
Ite  receavit  fra  George  Lyoune  for  ye  aual  rent  of  300  li  fra  Candilmes  1648 

to  Candilmes  1649       .....  xviij  li  x  s. 

Ite  receavit  fra  Phillane  Snype  for  ye  arent  of  200  merks  fra  Candilmes  1649 

to  Lambes  ye  sd  zeir  .  •  .  .  iiij  li  6s.  8d. 

s 


274  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1649 

Ite  receavit  fra  Johne  Wallace  cordoner  for  his  gildrie  fyne  .  jc  1l 

Ite  fra  W™  Fergisone         .  .  .  .  .  .  xlli 

Ite  receavit  for  ye  mortclathes      .  .  .  .  .     v  ll  xij  s. 

Ite  fra  the  deikines  of  qrter  compts  .  .  .  j^lxxxxix  1i 

Ite  fra  ye  litsters  .  .  .  .  .  .         vj  li  xiij  s.  4d. 

Ite  fra  ye  gairners  .  .  .  .  .  iij  li  vj  s.  8d. 

Ite  fra  Robert  Hoggiszaird  for  ye  arent  of  200  marks  2  zeirs  preceiding  Mer- 

times  1648      ......     xiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  fra  Ritchart  Allane  for  ye  arent  of  100  merks  fra  Mtimes  1647  to  Mtimes 

1648   .  .  .  .  .  .  .         iiij  li  vj  s.  8d. 

Ite  receavit  fra  ]\Iathow  Wilsone  for  ye  arent  of  200  merks  fra  Mtimes  1646 

to  Mtimes  1647  .....       viij  li  xiij  s.  4d. 

Suiiia  of  ye  chairge  is 

ane  thousand  twa  hundrethe  fyftie  nyn  punds  x  d. 

Dischairgc. 

Compt.  In  ye  first  debursit  be  ye  comptar  to  ye  four  pentioneris  Iiij  ll  v  s.  Sd. 

Ite  to  ye  sax  poore  men  in  the  hospitall   .  .  .  ij^^lxxxviij  li 

Ite  to  Wilham  Miller  late  colecto''  that  was  awin  to  him  at  ye  making  of  his 

compt  ......       Ixxxv  ll  3s.  8d. 

Ite  debursit  for  the  regra~n  of  Elderslees  and  Ro'  Hoggiszairds  band       viij  li 
Ite  for  gi\vin  2  chairges  yupon       .....        xxiiij  i 

Ite  to  ye  clerk       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  xx  li 

Ite  debursit  to  ye  deikin  conveaner  qlk  he  gawe  to  ye  clerk  of  instruments  at 

ye  taking  of  seasing  of  James  Smithes  land  and  ye  few  dewtie  mortifeid 

be  Gabrell  Conyngha  .....  xxvj  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  debursit  to  Johne  Wallace  cordoner  for  his  supphe      .  .  j^    ll 

Ite  for  7  pair  of  schoone  to  ye  poore    inde  .  .  .  xiiij  ll 

Ite  debursit  for  ane  kist  and  wining  sheit  to  IMitchell  Spence  .  v  li 

Ite  to  Androw  Lyill  in  pairt  pay'  of  ye  making  of  sex  stands  of  clathes  and  hois 

to  ye  poore  men  .  .  .  .  .  .  iij  ll 

Ite  for  ane  kist  and  wining  scheit  to  Jo"  Duncan  and  expenss  at  his  buriall 

v  li  vj  s.  8d. 
Ite  for  raising  of  new  Ires  aganis  Faill  and  giving  a  charge  iiij  ll  i8s. 

Ite  debursit  to  certane  poore  persones  at  Hallowmes  court  be  li  xvj  s.  vj  d. 
Mair  at  Candihnes  court    .....  Ixxxviiij  li  8s. 


Ite  at  Beltane  court  for  ye  lyke    . 

Ite  to  ane  sy  poore  woman  at  y'  tyme 

Ite  at  Lames  court 

Ite  to  ye  coUedge  collecto''  for  ye  bursar 

Item  for  ye  supplie  of  vmq"  W'iUia  Wallace  bairne 

Mair  to  James  Gilkersone 


Ixxix  li  I2s.  8d. 

XXX  s. 

Ixxviij  li  i8s.  8d. 

Ixvj  li  13s.  4d. 

vj  li 

iiij  ll 


1649]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  275 


Mair  to  Catrein  Bumsyde  .  .  .  .  .  x  li 

Mair  to  Claud  Spreull        .  .  .  .  .  .  x  1l 

Ite  debursit  to  ye  deikin  of  ye  cordoners  to  helpe  to  put  vmq"  John  Hamiltons 
sone  to  a  craft  ......  xvj  li 

Ite  to  Thomas  Stoddart  Stein  Wodrow  and  John  Scott   kerter     .  iiij  ti 

Mair  to  George  Huchesone  talzo''  .  .  .  iij  li  vj  s.  8d. 

Ite  debursit  for  26  ells  of  cloathes  to  be  claithes  to  ye  poore  men  at  35s.  ye  ell 

Iv  li  15s. 
Ite  to  y™  for  round  claith  to  be  sarking  12  ells  at  9s.  6d.  ye  ell        v  li  14s. 


Ite  9s.  for  ilk  ell  of  35  ells  gainheklings 

Ite  for  33  ells  of  hardine  at  8s.  ye  ell 

Ite  for  coalls  and  peits 

Ite  for  a  pair  of  schoes  to  Quentance 

Ite  for  redding  ye  close 

Ite  debursit  at  ye  meiting  of  ye  dekins 

Mair  for  a  riddle    . 


XV  li  15s. 

xiij  li  4s. 

XXX  li  I2S.  8d. 

.      46s.   8d. 

8s. 

28s. 

xj  s. 


Suma  of  ye  discharge  is 

ane  thowsand  ane  hundrethe  threttie  thrie  punds  6s.  lod. 


Rests  in  ye  comptars  handis 


j^xxv  li  14s. 


The  qlk  compt  befoir  wryttin  being  red  calculat  and  layd  and  at  lenth 
considerit  baith  chairge  and  dischairge  yin  conteanet  the  samyne  and  everie 
article  yof  was  allowit  and  approvin  be  ye  deikin  conveaner  deikines  of  crafts 
and  yf  brethreine  and  does  heirby  exoner  and  simp'  dischairge  the  sd  Artho'' 
Taketts  of  his  haill  intromissioune  he  making  thankfuU  pay'  to  the  pnt  collecto"' 
of  ye  forsd  sowme  of  ane  hundrethe  twentie  fyve  punds  xiiij  s. 

The  sd  day  Johne  Lipar  hemerman  is  be  plurahtie  of  vottis  electit  collecto''  Lipar  coiector. 
to  ye  hospitall  for  ye  zeir  to  come  q*  being  sent  for  came  and  accepted  and 
gave  his  aithe  as  vse  is. 

The  same  day  the  forsd  Artho^  Takets  late  collector  producet  the  haill  Late  coiector 
bands  he  had  gottin  out  of  befoir  belonging  to  ye  hospitall  qlks  wer  put  in    ^°  ^" 
the  box. 

And  Johne  Lipar  new  elected  collecto''  gat  vp  ane  band  of  threttie  punds  Moneys 
awn  be  W™  Birrell  to  the  hospitall  and  ordaines  him  to  be  charget  ywt  at  the  ^°  '"^^°'^' 
making  of  his  compt. 


The  sd  day  ordaines  the  collector  to  deburs  to  Johne  M<^Ben  to  helpe  to  Warrand. 
liberat  him  out  of  ye  tolboothe  fyve  doUoris. 


276 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW, 


[1649 


Fallowes   the    inventar  of   ve   haill   bands   conteaneing   the   haill 
sowmes  of  money  adehtit  to  ye  hospitall  and  q'-  drents  ar  awin  yby. 

Love.  Item  awin  be  Johne  Love  and  his  cationers  twa  hundrethe  marks  qrof  y""  is 

arent  awin  at   Mtimes  1649  12  zeirs. 
Campbell.        Ite  awin  be  M''  Niniane  Campbell  as  prin"  James  Hamilton  and  Ro*  Homer 

his  caors  ane  hundrethe  punds  to  be  payit  at   Mtimes  1649  w^  ane  zeirs 

arent. 
Ite  James  Scheills  and  his  caors  ane  hundrethe  merkis  to  be  payit  at  Mtimes 

1649  w*  ane  zeirs  arent  4  ll  6s.  8d. 
EUerslie.  Ite  the  Laird  of  Elderslie  as  prin"  vmq"  Macolme  Crawfoord  of  Cartisburne 

and  vmq"  W™  Conyngha  of  Aiket  his  cationers  fyve  hundrethe  merks 

to  be  pavit  at  Mtimes  1649  w*  ane  half  zeirs  arent  10  ll. 
Lyiii.  Ite  be  Androw  Lyill  and  his  cationers  fourtie  punds. 

Smythe.  Item  be  James  Smythe  fyve  hundrethe  merks  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  1649 

vv'  ane  zeir  and  ane  halfes  arent. 
Finiay.  Ite  be  Rot  Findlay  ane  hundrethe  pundis  to  be  payit  at  Mtimes  1649  with 

twa  zeiris  arent. 
Buchaunane,     Ite  be  Johne  Buchannan  baxt  and  his  cationers  fyve  hundrethe  merks  to  be 

payit  at  Mtimes  1649  w^  ane  zeirs  arent  26-13-4. 
BodUhauciie.     Ite  be  (  )   Hamiltoune  of  Bothuallhauche  as  prin"  M''  Johne 

Dunlope  his  cationer  thrie  hundrethe  merks  to  be  payit  at  Mtimes  1649 

w'  twa  zeirs  arent.  _ 

.\iiane.  Ite  be  Ritchard  Allane  ane  hundrethe  merks  to  be  payit  at  Mtimes  1649  w* 

ane  zeirs  arent. 
Lyoun.  Ite  be  George  Lyoune  and  his  cationers  thrie  hundreth  punds  to  be  payit  at 

Candilmes  1650  w'  ane  zeirs  arent. 
Laird  Ite  be  the  Laird  of  Overpollok  and  his  earners  fyve  hundrethe  punds  to  be 

overpoiiok.  ^^^.^  ^^  Mtimcs  1649  with  halfe  ane  zeirs  arent. 

Countes  Ite  be  ye  Countes  of  Eglingtowne  and  hir  cationers  ane  thowsand  merks  to 

Egiingtoun.  ^^  ^^^.^  ^^  Mtimes  1649  w'  2  zeirs  arent. 

Padieand         Ite  be  James  Peadie  Thomas  Scott  and  W™  Wilsone  four  hundrethe  punds 
"'y'*'  to  be  payit  at  Mtimes  1649  w'  ane  zeirs  arent. 

Millar.  Ite  be  Johne  Miller  talzo"'  four  hundrethe  merkis  payable  at    Mtimes  1649 

with  ane  zeirs  arent. 
cu);miyiig.        Ite  be  Johne  Cumyng  mchf  fyve  hundrethe  merkis  to  be  payit  at  Mtimes 

1649  w'  ane  zeirs  arent. 
Wiisoiie.  Ite  be  Johne  Wilsone  elder  tanner  twa  hundreth  punds  to  be  payit  at  Mtimes 

1649  w*  2  zeirs  arent.  _ 

Woddrow.        Ite  be  Johne  Woddrow  maltman  twa  hundrethe  merks  to  be  payit  at  Mtimes 

1649  w'  ane  zeirs  arent. 
Wilsone.  Ite  awin  be  Mathow  Wilsone  twa  hundreth  merks  to  be  payit  at  Mtimes  1649 

w'  2  zeirs  arent. 


1649]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  277 

Ite  be  Robert  Hoggiszaird  twa  hundrethe  merks  to  be  payit  at  Mtimes  1649  Hoggiszaird. 

w'  ane  zeirs  arent. 
Ite  be  James  Watsone  and    his  caors  twa  hundrethe  merks  to  be  payit  at  Watsone. 

Mtimes  1649  w'  4  zeirs  arent. 
Ite  be  Johne  Adame  mch<'  twa  hundrethe  merkis  to  be  payit  at  Mtimes  1649  Adame. 

w*  ane  zeirs  arent. 
Ite  be  Duncane  Aikein  and  his  caors  twa  hundreth  punds  to  be  payit  at  Mtimes  Aikiue. 

1649  with  ane  zeirs  arent.  _ 

Ite  awin  be  John  Neisbit  talzo"'  fyve  hundreth  punds  to  be  payit  at  Mtimes  Neisbit. 

1649  w'  ane  zeirs  arent. 

Ite  be  Piter  Gemill  and  his  caors  thrie  liundrethe  merks  to  be  payit  at  Candlemes  Gemmili. 

1650  with  ane  zeirs  anwal  rent. 

Ite  be  Phillen  Snype  twa  hundrethe  merkis  to  be  payit  at  Candilmes  1650  Saype. 

w*  half  zeirs  arent.  _ 

Ite  be  John  Bar  and  his  caors  fyve  hundrethe  merks  to  be  payit  at  Mtimes  Bar. 

1649  w*  half  ane  zeirs  arent. 
Ite  y""  is  awin  to  ye  hospitall  ane  few  dewtie  of  audit  punds  x  s.  qlk  is  to  be 

vphfted  out  of  William  Mitchells  lands  in  Drygait  conform  to  Gabriell 

Conynghaes  mortifica-ne. 

Sexlo  Novembris  1649. 

The  said  daw  [?day]  allows  aff  to  ArthC  Tackets  aff  ye  first  end  of  that  Warrand. 
qlk  he  is  restand  at  ye  making  of  his  compt  alse  meikle  as  ye  arent  of  ane 
hundrethe  merks  will  extend  to  for  ane  zeir  qlk  he  borrowit  for  ye  hospitalls 
vse. 

The  sd  day  Thomas  Scott  producet  of  ye  burgess  silver  he  colectit  sen  Coiector 
Johne  Andersone  left  it  aff  and  begines  at  on  John  Logane  twentie  seivin  """"^J- 
punds  14  s.  qlk  is  givin  to  the  colecto''  and  he  is  to  be  charget  yw'. 

The  same  day  William  Reid  gave  ye  colecto''  fiftie  ane  punds  qrwith  he 
is  to  be  charget. 

The  sd  day  the  bands  fallowing  ar  takin  out  and  giwin  to  ye  colecto"'  to  Bandis  takin 


out. 


be  renewit  viz  vmq"  Ritchard  AUanes  for  ane  hundrethe  merks  John  Neisbits 
for  fyve  hundrethe  punds  and  Johne  Barrs  of  fyve  hundrethe  merks. 

The  same  day  be  pluralitie  of  votts  Johne  Patersone  scoolemaster  con-  ScoUm'. 
forme  to  ye  former  act  sett  downe  yranent  is  electit  scoolmaster  and  ordanis 
him  to  [be]  payit  conforme  to  ye  sds  acts. 

The  said  day  becaus  Cuthbert  Greg  late  deikin  of  ye  cowperis  hes  refuisit  Grege. 
to  rander  ye  box  being  requyrit  severall  tymes  be  the  officer  at  comand  of  ye 
deikin  conveiner  and  refuiset  to  come  heir  this  day  being  warnit  to  yat  effect 


278 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1649 


tharfor  desyres  that  the  magistrats  may  be  acquented  to  put  him  in  waird 
q"  he  be  sensible  of  his  fault  and  to  pay  ten  punds  money  to  ye  poore  and 
ordaines  him  not  to  beir  office  w*  ye  crafts  heirefter  q"  he  give  satisfactioun 
to  yis  place. 

The  said  day  reschinds  and  anulls  ye  former  act  sett  downe  against  Robert 
Findlay  qrby  he  was  discharget  to  beir  office  with  ye  craftis  or  to  be  on  ye 
deikin  conveiners  cysell. 

The  said  day  gives  warrand  to  ye  dekine  of  bonatmakers  to  mak  choyse 
of  ane  colecto''  for  colecting  of  ye  comoune  guid  quha  sail  be  anserable  to  ye 
deikin  and  masters  for  ye  guid  of  ye  craft. 

Decimo  sexto  Novebris  1650  [?  1649]. 

The  said  day  y''  was  produceit  in  the  name  of  ye  reUct  of  vrnq^^  Johne 
Wallace  maltman  twentie  merkis  money  left  be  him  of  legacie  to  the  poore 
in  ye  hous  qlk  is  giwin  to  ye  collector  and  he  is  to  be  charget  ywith. 

The  sd  day  Johne  Patersoune  formerlie  electit  scoolmaister  vpon  ye  saxt 
day  of  yis  instant  is  enterit  and  receavit  yis  day  quha  is  to  carie  himselfe  in 
his  chairge  conforme  to  ye  instructiones  to  be  givin  to  him  be  ye  ministers. 

Cauldwall  The  same  day  be  pluralitie  of  vottis  James  Caldwell  is  admited  to  be  ane 

ho^it'aii."  ^^    of  ye  sax  poore  men  in  the  hospitall  in  place  of  vrnq^'  Androw  Gray  cordoner 
and  ordaines  the  colecto''  to  pay  him  conform  as  ye  rest. 

Wanand.  The  sd  day  ordaines  the  colecto'^  to  pay  to  Androw  LyiU  talzo"^  ten  merks 

in  compleit  pay'  of  all  y'  is  awin  to  him  for  making  the  poore  mens  claithes. 


Finlay. 


Dekine 
bonnet- 
makeris. 


Legacie 
Wallace. 


Scoolm'. 


Decimo  quinto  Janiiarij  1650. 

Kidprcnteis.  The  sd  day  Leonard  Kid  is  bookit  prenteis  w^  James  Rodger  wifar  for 

seivine  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indento'' 
of  ye  dait  of  yir  pnts. 


Wriclit 
prenteis. 


Gorballis. 


Quarto  Feb"'  1650. 

The  sd  day  Johne  Wreicht  is  buikit  prenteis  with  W™  Glen  zo"^  baxter 
for  seivine  zeirs  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indento'^  of  ye 
dait  of  yir  pnts. 

Vigesimo  Feh^'  1650. 

The  qlk  day  Niniane  Gilhagie  bailzie  Thomas  Scott  late  deikin  conveaner 
in  absence  of  ye  present  deikin  conveaner  Piter  Johnestoune  late  balzie  in 
absence  of  Robert  Boyd  deikin  of  tailzo^'s  and  haill  remanent  deikines  of 
craftis  w'  ye  visito^'  of  maltmen  being  all  conveinet  did  vnanimusHe  allow  and 


1650]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  279 

approve  off  ye  bargane  maid  be  ye  towne  with  Sir  Robert  Douglase  anent  the 
hying  of  ye  Gorballs  and  to  shaw  y''  wiUingnes  yto  they  ar  all  content  that  the 
haill  moneys  [owing]  to  y  hospitall  be  colectit  in  and  imployit  out  againe  y* 
way  to  helpe  to  by  the  fourt  part  of  ye  bargane  and  everie  deikin  pntt  and 
Piter  Johnstoun  in  name  of  ye  deikin  of  tailzo''s  wndertakis  to  convein  y 
craftis  w'  all  diligence  and  to  try  q'  ewerie  ane  of  y""  may  lend  for  making  vpe 
ye  fourt  pairt  of  ye  sowme  and  to  meit  ye  morne  in  ye  deikin  cyveiners  house 
and  y  mak  report. 

Vigesimo  prima  Feb"^  1650. 

The  sd  day  the  haill  deikins  of  craftis  and  visito''  of  maltmen  being  con-  Gorbaiiis. 
veanet  in  the  dekin  conveinars  hous  and  ye  sd  Piter  Johnstoun  and  that  for 
making  y^  report  appoynted  conform  to  ye  former  act  of  ye  20  of  yis  instant 
its  concludit  all  in  ane  voyce  that  ye  hospitall  sail  advance  for  bying  in  of  ye 
lourt  pairt  of  ye  Gorballs  the  sowme  of  aucht  thowsand  merks  and  the  deikines 
and  visito""  of  maltmen  wndertakes  to  advance  and  lend  the  sowmes  fallowing 
for  yat  effect  they  getting  securitie  y'^ior  for  ye  good  of  y''  several!  craftis 
repue  viz  the  tailzo^'s  sax  thowsand  marks  the  maltmen  sax  thousand  merks 
the  hefhermen  twa  thowsand  merkis  the  cordoners  twa  thousand  merks  the 
skynners  twa  thowsand  merks  the  vifars  ane  thowsand  merks  the  wrights  ane 
thowsand  merks  the  maissones  fyve  hundrethe  merks  the  baxters  fyve  hundrethe 
the  flescho''s  ane  thowsand  merks  and  ye  coupers  ane  thowsand  iiiks  and 
in  lyk  maner  Niniane  Gilhagie  balzie  is  electit  to  ryde  eist  to  signifie  to  3'e 
provest  and  vyrs  now  at  Ed""  thair  wiUingnes  to  vndertak  ye  fourt  pairt  of  ye 
bargane. 

Vigesimo  qiiinto  Feb^>  1650. 

The  same  day  Robert  Patersone  sone  to  vmq^'  Thomas  Patersoune  is  Patersone 
buikit  prenteis  w'  Johne  Patersone  wifar  for  seivin  zeirs  and  twa  zeirs  yefter  P''*'^'^'^- 
for  meit  and  fie  conform  to  ye  indento""  of  ye  dait  ye  23  of  Octo"^  last. 

PenuUimo  Feb"'  1650. 

The  sd  day  Patrik  Lyoune  sone  to  Johne  Lyoune  mariner  is  buikit  prenteis  Lyoun 
with  Archibald  Glen  \\eifar  for  seivine  zeirs  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  P"^"^"'"^- 
conform  to  ye  indento'  of  ye  dait  ye  first  of  March  1647. 

Quarto  Martij  1650. 

The  qlk  day  the  deikine  conveaner  deikines  of  craftis  and  yr  counsall  GorbaiUs. 
quha  for  the  maist  pairt  war  pnt  did  all  vnanimuslie  condiscend  and  aggree 
of  the  bargane  maid  anent  the  Gorballs. 

The  same  day  the  collecto''  gave  in  ane  band  of  Ritchard  Allanes  of  four  Bands  gevin 
hundrethe  merks  qlk  was  made  vpe  be  ane  band  of  ane  hundrethe  merks  that  ^^'^^' 


28o 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1650 


was  a\vin  be  his  vmq"  father  and  with  thrie  hundrethe  merks  payit  in  be 
Duncane  Aikein  qlk  he  was  awin  be  band  as  also  he  producet  ane  band  granted 
be  Johne  Tennent  of  fyve  hundrethe  punds  qlk  was  [awin]  of  befoir  be  Johne 
Neisbit  be  his  band  as  also  he  gave  bak  Johne  Barrs  band  and  producet  ane 
band  of  fyve  hundrethe  merks  awin  be  W™  Clydisdaill  and  his  caors  qlk  was 
awine  of  old  be  ye  Laird  of  EldersUe. 


Bands  gevin 
out. 


The  same  day  it  was  thoght  guid  and  expedient  be  consent  of  ye  deikin 
conveaner  haill  dekines  and  thair  counsell  that  to  the  effect  moneys  may  be 
tymeoushe  gottine  for  to  compleit  ye  sowme  of  8000  merks  undertakin  be  y™ 
to  be  payit  for  ye  vse  of  ye  Gorballs  that  the  chairge  yrof  be  comitted  to 
severall  persounes  quha  ar  to  tak  vpon  them  to  requyre  everie  persoune  y' 
is  awin  to  the  hospitall  to  have  y^  moneys  readie  against  Witsonday  nixt  and 
aither  to  get  in  ye  moneys  or  ells  give  in  horning  and  captioune  against  ye 
awners  yrof  and  first  they  comittit  [to]  Thomas  Campbell  the  getting  in  of  ye 
moneys  awin  be  yir  persounes  viz  M^  Niniane  Campbell  James  Scheills  the 
aires  of  \'mq'i  James  Smythe  and  Ro'  Findlay  Ite  to  James  Elphistoune 
the  moneys  awin  be  Johne  Buchannan  vmq"  James  Hamiltoune  of  Bothuall- 
hauche  Ritchard  Allane  and  George  Lyoune  Item  to  William  Phillip  the 
moneys  awin  be  ye  Laird  of  OverpoUok  the  Countes  of  Eghngtoune  Johne 
Miller  and  Ro'  Huntar  Ite  to  James  Padie  the  moneys  awin  be  himselfe 
Thomas  Scot  and  \\'™  Wilsoune  be  Johne  Cummyng  and  Johne  \^'ilsoune  eldir 
tanner  Ite  to  W™  Coatts  the  moneys  awin  be  Mathow  ^^'ilsone  Piter  Gemill 
Johne  Woddrow  and  Phillane  Snype  Ite  to  Thomas  M'^Cuir  the  moneys 
awin  be  Ro*  Hoggiszard  Johne  Bar  and  Johne  Adame. 


Cauldwell. 


The  said  day  the  deposeing  of  James  Caldwell  out  of  ye  hospitall  be  ye 
deikin  conveiner  was  approvin  by  aU  who  war  present  in  respect  of  his  grose 
fault  in  becomeing  cationer  in  ane  suspensioune  wronging  yby  ye  kings  leidges 
qlk  he  aucht  not  to  have  done  in  respect  of  ye  poore  conditioune  he  was  in 
and  ordaines  the  colecto''  to  pay  to  Johne  Wyllie  cordoner  sax  punds  that  ye 
said  James  sould  have  had  for  his  last  quarters  pay'  and  vpone  meir 
comisera'une  and  pitie  they  continow  ye  sd  James  to  remaine  in  the  sd 
hospitall  q"  they  farder  ad\'\'se. 


Nesmythe  in 
hospitall. 


The  sd  day  Thomas  Naismythe  bonatmaker  is  admited  as  ane  of  ye 
ordinar  sax  poore  men  in  the  hospitall  and  ordaines  the  colecto''  to  pa}'  him 
q'  is  his  dew  as  he  does  ye  rest. 


Warrand.  Ite  ordaines  the  colecto''  to  pay  to  Niniane  Gilhagie  for  the  last  tjTne  they 

sent  him  to  Ed^  twentie  marks  and  ten  marks  for  his  horse  hyre  and  ye  mans 
charges  y'  went  w'  him. 


1650]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  281 

Decimo  nono  Marti]  1650. 

Ordaines  the  collecto''  to  pay  to  (  )   Liddell  xxiiij  ti  7s.   foir  Warrand 

maill  for  yat  house  at  ye  wyndheid  sett  be  him  to  Johne  Pateisoune  scoole- 
master  qlk  is  for  ye  maill  yrof  fra  Witsonday  nixt  to  Witsonday  1651  and  is 
ye  first  zeir  of  fyve  sett  be  him  to  ye  deikin  conveaner  for  yat  vse. 

MemorandQ  the  collecto''  hes  receavit  fra  Artho""  Taket  saxtein  punds  5s.  Memorandum 
that  was  omittit  in  his  last  compt  of  arents  y'  he  gat  fra  Johne  Neisbit  for  ye 
qlk  he  is  to  be  chargeit  at  ye  making  of  his  compt. 

Duodecimo  Aprilis  1650. 

The  said  day  the  bandis  fallowing  war  takine  out  and  givin  to  the  per-  Bands  gevine 
sounes  eftimameit  to  the  effect  the  sowmes  yin  conteaneit  might  be  imbroght 
to  pay  y''  pairt  of  the  bargane  of  the  Gorbalhs  viz  to  Thomas  Campbell  the 
bands  granted  be  M''  Niniane  Campbell  James  ScheiUs  and  Robert  Findlay 
Ite  to  James  Elphistoune  the  bands  granted  be  John  Buchannan  Ritchard 
ADane  and  George  Lyoune  Ite  to  Willia  PhilHp  the  bands  granted  be  the 
Countes  of  Eghngtoune  the  Laird  of  Overpollok  Johne  Miller  and  Robert 
Hunter  Ite  to  James  Padie  the  bands  granted  be  himselfe  Johne  Wilsoune 
elder  Thomas  Scot  and  Willia  Wilsone  Ite  to  Wilham  Cotts  and  Patrik 
Bryce  the  bandis  granted  be  Piter  Gemill  Mathow  Wilsone  Phillane  Snype 
and  Johne  Woddrow  Ite  to  Thomas  M^Cuir  the  bands  granted  be  Johne 
Bar  and  Johne  Adame. 

The  sd  day  it  was  reported  and  declaret  be  ye  deikin  cyveiner  in  pns  of  Armes. 
the  deikines  that  he  had  aggreid  w'  ye  deikin  of  hemermen  to  hold  and  keepe 
the  airmes  cleane  and  cleir  for  pay'  of  ten  merkis  zeirlie  qlk  was  allowit  and 
approvin  and  the  colecto''  and  his  successo''s  obleist  to  pay  him  the  samyne 
zeirlie  dureing  his  service  and  to  begin  at  Beltane  nixt. 

Decimo  septimo  Aprilis  1650. 

The  sd  day  Robert  PoUok  sone  to  vmq'i  James  PoUok  gardner  in  Gorballs  Prenteis 
is  buikit  prenteis  with  James  Jape  skinner  to  serve  him  seivin  zeirs  conform 
to  the  indento''  of  ye  dait  ye  8  of  Octo^  last. 

Vndecimo  J  iilij  1650. 

The  sd  day  the  deikine  conveiner  and  haill  deikines  (except  ye  deikins  of  Coiiecto'  to  ye 
fIescho''s  and  bonatmakers)  being  conveinet  it  was  condiscendit  and  aggreit     °'^  ^  '^' 
vpon  be  them  all  that  ane  collecto''  sould  be  chosine  for  ingathering  the  rents 
of  ye  Gorballs  and  Brigend  and  that  the  deikin  conveiner  and  remanent  of  ye 
deikines  of  craftis  [and  brethren]  of  counsell  to  condiscend  and  aggree  vpon 
ye  man  with  the  proveist  bailleis  and  counsell  and  m""  of  Hutchisons  hospitall. 


282  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGO\A'.       [1650 

Part  mo''  The  Same  day  the  deikine  conveiner  producet  ane  compt  of  the  haill 

GorbaiUs/^  sowmes  of  money  that  was  receavit  be  Thomas  Campbell  for  ye  hospitall  and 
fra  the  haill  remanent  deikins  of  craftis  fallowing  and  was  delyverit  be  the  sd 
Thomas  in  name  of  the  hous  and  ye  sds  deikins  in  pairt  pay*  of  y''  fourt  pairt 
payment  of  ye  lands  of  Gorballs  qlk  compt  was  ordanit  to  be  buikit  and  is  as 
fallowis  Ite  in  ye  first  for  the  hospitall  itselfe  four  thowsand  thrie  hundiethe 
merkis  by  and  besyde  fyfe  hundrethe  merks  of  gold  that  was  givin  to  Sir 
Robert  Douglas  ladie  and  it  is  to  be  remembrit  that  the  collector  payit  out  for 
the  exchange  yrof  Ite  from  the  maltmen  four  thousand  merkis  from  the 
tailzo^'s  fyfe  thowsand  merkis  from  the  heinermen  threttein  hundrethe  threttie 
thrie  merkis  four  schillings  4d  Ite  fra  the  cordoneris  ane  thowsand  punds 
Ite  fra  the  wTichts  aucht  hundrethe  merks  Ite  fra  ye  skinners  twa  thowsand 
merks  Ite  fra  ye  flescho'^s  ane  thowsand  merks  Ite  from  ye  weivars  sewin 
hundrethe  merks  fra  ye  coupers  sax  hundrethe  merks  from  ye  baxters  fywe 
hundrethe  marks     Ite  fra  the  maissones  fyfe  hundrethe  merks. 

Duodecimo  Augustj  1650. 

Money  The  said  day  the  collector  gave  in  ane  compt  of  certane  moneyis  debursit 

debursit  be  ye  j,g  j^jjjj  j^j^jj  aught  to  be  payit  proportionallie  be  ye  house  and  vyrs  q^*  hes  y'' 
pairt  of  ye  Gorballs  viz  debursit  for  repairing  ye  persounes  manse  of  Govane 
fourtein  punds  5s.  Ite  for  ye  last  twa  outreiks  of  the  Gorballs  twa  hundrethe 
merks  Mair  debursit  to  Nmian  Gilliagie  for  goeing  to  Ed''  anent  y*  bussines 
twentie  punds  Item  debursit  for  the  changeing  of  500  merks  in  gold  twentie 
ane  punds  Item  debursit  to  Tliomas  Campbell  for  his  charges  in  Ed'  ye  tyme 
he  touk  ye  money  with  liim  mentionat  in  ye  former  act  twentie  four  punds 
Ite  for  careying  ye  money  to  Ed"^  twelf  punds,  extending  in  haiU  to  twa 
hundrethe  twentie  four  punds  xj  s.  8d.  and  because  ye  collector"  hes  payit  it 
out  all  ordaines  everie  deikin  to  pay  in  y"^  proportiounes  to  him  conforme  to 
thair  severall  ry%  of  the  saids  landis  of  Gorballs  and  the  deikines  of  heinermen 
wifars  and  the  sd  Thomas  Campbell  to  cast  ye  samyne. 

Compt  of  the  Item  anent  the  haill  bandis  that  was  givine  out  vpone  the  fourt  of  Merche 

bands  gevine  j^gj.  fgr  ingetting  of  monej's  to  pay  thair  proportioune  pairt  of  ye  lands  of 
Gorballs  Ite  dilligence  fallowing  was  given  be  these  receavers  of  ye  sds  bands 
viz  the  sd  Thomas  Campbell  pairt  yrof  fuUie  satisfeit  James  Elphistounes 
pairt  satisfeit  except  Bothuallhauches  and  George  Lyounes  Ite  W™  Phillips 
pairt  satisfeit  except  Johne  Millers  and  Robert  Hunters  Ite  James  Padies 
pairts  and  WiUiam  Cottis  fullie  satisfeit  Ite  Thomas  M'^Cuirs  pairt  fullie 
satisfeit  except  Ro'  Hoggiszards  and  the  haill  moneys  receavit  was  debursit 
for  yame  in  Ed'  be  Thomas  Campbell  for  to  helpe  to  pay  out  the  house  pairt 
of  ye  landis  of  Gorballs  and  the  money  debursit  extends  to  twentie  thrie 
thowsand. 


i650]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  283 

The  sd  day  thair  was  ane  band  producet  be  the  deikin  conveaner  granted  Band 
be  M''  Niniane  Campbell  and  his  cationers  conteining  the  sowme  of  four  cor'doners.'"'^ ' 
hundiethe  fourty  aught  merks  and  y'  is  includit  yin  the  sowme  of  ane  hundrethe 
punds  qlk  was  awin  be  the  sd  Ninian  to  the  hous  w'  certaine  bygaine  arents 
and  the  deikin  conveiner  hes  givine  his  ticket  to  the  cordoners  for  ye  sowme 
of  twa  hundrethe  thrie  sco''  aughtein  merkis  in  satisfactioune  of  ye  lyk  sowme 
y'  was  awin  be  ye  sd  M''  Niniane  to  yame  and  becaus  ye  haill  band  is  drawne 
vpe  for  the  behove  of  ye  hospitall  the  haill  deikines  of  crafts  and  remanent 
members  of  ye  house  ar  to  releive  him  yof. 

The  sd  day  Johne  Allansoune  weiwar  is  admitted  and  receavit  to  be  ane  Aiiansoune. 
of  ye  sax  poore  men  in  the  hospitall  in  respect  that  Johne  Wyllie  cordoner 
had  gottin  his  place  in  Hutchesons  hospitall  and  ordaines  the  coUecto''  to 
satisfie  him  since  Lammes  last. 

The  sd  day  ordaines  Robert  Cumyng  Thomas  Campbell  and  John  Lipar 
first  to  pay  in  ye  sowmes  awin  be  them  for  yair  gildrie  and  then  to  petitioune 
the  hous. 

Peniiltimo  August]  1650. 
The  sd  da\-  the  bands  fallowing  wer  takin  out  and  given  to    ye  psons  Band  gevine 
fallowing  to  the  effect  the  sowmes  awin  yby  be  ye  psones  yin  contenit  may  be  °"'' 
gottin  in  for  compleiting  the  hospitalls  pairt  pryce  of  ye  lands  of  Gorballis 
viz  John  Tennents  band  of  500  li  givin  to  Walter  M<=Allae  M''  Ninian  Campbells 
band  givin  to  the  deikin  of  hemermen  w*  W™  Clydsdaills  band  for  100  merks 
Ite  George  Lj'on  and  Johne  Millers  band  givin  to  ye  deikin  of  ye  wifars     Item 
John  Zoungs  band  for  500  merks  and  Ro'  Hunters  band  givin  to  Ro'  Boyd 
and  ordanes  Piter  Johnston  and  ye  deikin  of  hemermen  to  speik  w*  M''  Johne 
Dunlope  anent  Bothuallhauches  moneys  for  qlk  he  is  cationer. 

The  sd  day  ordaines  Androw  Gray  to  have  twelf  schillings  ilk  weik  for  his  Gray. 
supplie  by  his  ordinar  allowance  and  aproves  of  ye  sax  pundis  givin  and  bestowed 
in  extraordinars  already. 

The  said  day  compeirit  Patrik  Adame  tailzo""  in  pns  of  the  deikine  conveiner  .■\darae. 
and  deikines  of  craft  and  confessit  y'  he  had  WTongit  ye  place  in  his  raschnes 
conform  to  ane  former  act  sett  downe  be  him  yanent  of  befoir  and  yrfor  they 
pase  fra  y'  wrong  and  reponis  him  to  his  full  ry'  he  had  befoir  the  setting  downe 
of  ye  sd  act. 

Septimo  Octobris  1650. 

The  sd  day  WiUiam  Ly'bodie  now  ane  of  the  present  balleis  of  this  bru' 
and  late  deikine  conveaner  being  conveanet  wth  the  deikins  of  crafts  in  thair 
hospitall  and  thair  coimsall  wha  for  the  maist  pairt  wer  present  for  electing 
of  thrie  persounes  of  thair  number  to  be  presented  to  the  proveist  baiUeis  and 


284 


RECGRDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1650 


J  ohnesone 
d.  convenar. 


counsell  of  yis  bru'  and  vyrs  haveand  entres  this  day  to  the  effect  that  ane 
of  yame  might  be  electid  dekine  conveaner  of  this  bni'  for  the  zeir  to  come  be 
pluralitie  of  vottis  thir  persounes  fallowing  war  elected  viz  Niniane  Gilhagie 
Piter  Johnestoune  and  Thomas  Scott  and  ordaines  the  hte  to  be  presented  by 
Robert  Wilsoune. 

Thairefter  the  abovenamed  Piter  Johnstoune  being  elected  dekine  con- 
veaner he  efter  mature  dehberatioune  did  elect  the  persones  fallowing  to  be  on 
his  counsell  for  the  zeir  to  come  viz 


William  PhiUip 
Patrik  Adame 
W™  Cotts 
John  Buchannan 
Patrik  Bryce 
Rot  Caldwell 
Andro  Muir 

Wilham  Ly'bodie  balzie 


Thomas  Campbell 
Robert  Reid 
Alex''  Hohnes 
Johne  Caldwell 
Andro  Snype 
W"  Craig 


Robert  Wilsone 
Henrj'  Robisoune 
Johne  Neill 
Johne  Lipar 
Johne  Pittiloch 

Robert  Boyd 
Wni  Knox 
John  Tennent 
James  Blair 
John  Hart 

Walter  M^Allay 
Thomas  Inglis 
Mathow  \\'ilson 
Ro*  Steine 
Johne  ^^'allace 

Thos  Scott 
Johne  Scot 

John  Boik 
Andro  Leis 
Alex""  Zounger 


Johne  Boyd 
Johne  Rankein 


Johne  Hall 

Ninian  Gilhagie 
Walter  Bryce 
Patrik  Bryce 
Andro  Colquhoune 
John  Miller 

John  Danizell 
James  Elphinstoune 


Georg  Broome 

Ro'  Cumyng 
James  Padie 

George  Lyone 
Ro'  Snj'pe 

Gawin  Nesmyth 
James  Broune 
Thomas  Lourie 


i65o]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  285 

Decimo  Octobris  1650. 

The  qlk  day  Piter  Johnestoune  deikin  conveaner  w  itli  the  dekins  of  crafts 
and  remanent  of  his  counsell  being  conveanet  for  electing  four  of  thair  number 
to  sitt  on  ye  dein  of  gilds  counsell  for  the  zeir  to  come  conforme  to  the  ordo"" 
prescryvit  be  the  Ire  of  gildrie  be  pluralitie  of  votts  thir  persones  fallowing 
war  electit  for  ye  effect  forsd  viz  Thomas  Scott  Thomas  Campbell  Robert 
Wilsone  and  Patrik  Bryce. 

Primo  Novembris  1G50. 

The  qlk  day  tiie  deikine  conveiner  dcikins  of  craftis  and  y""  counsall  wha 
for  the  most  pairt  wer  present  being  conveinit  in  ye  crafts  hospitall  Johne 
Lipar  late  collecto''  maid  his  compt  of  his  haill  intromissioune  with  the  hospitall 
guids  since  ye  tyme  of  his  electioune  and  debursmentis  of  ye  samyne  and  q''of 
chairge  and  dischairge  fallowis  and  first  ye 

Chairge. 

In  ye  first  the  comptar  chairges  himselfe  with  the  sowme  fallowing  receavit 
be  him  fra  Artho''  Taketts  last  collecto''  yat  was  awin  be  him  at  ye  making 
of  his  last  cpt  exteding  to       .  .  .  .        j'xxv  ll    xiiij  s. 

Ite  receavit  be  him  fra  vmq"  Williame  Burrell  y'  he  was  awin  be  band    xxx  ll 

Ite  receavit  be  him  fra  Thomas  Scot  of  burgess  silver  xxvij  li  xiiij  s. 

Ite  receavit  be  him  fra  William  Reid  of  the  small  dewteis  conteant  in  ye  rentall 
the  sd  W">  being  payed  for  colecting  yof        .  .  .  Ij  ll 

Ite  receavit  of  legacie  fra  the  rehct  of  vmq"  Johne  Wallace  maltman 

xiij  li  vj  s.  8d. 

Ite  receavit  be  him  fra  ye  sd  Artho""  Taketts  qlk  was  gottin  fra  John  Neisbit 
and  oitiittit  in  ye  sd  ArthoJ's  compt     .  .  .  xvj  ti  v  s. 

Mair  receavit  fra  William  Andirsone  for  his  gildrie  fyne     .  .  j^^  tl 

Ite  receavit  frae  W  Hew  Blair  qlk  was  awin  be  vmq"  Johne  Padie  as  being 
consignet  in  his  hands  for  ye  vse  of  ye  wTights  q^^  assignet  ye  samy  to 
ye  hous  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  xx  ti 

Ite  receavit  fra  ye  13  deikins  of  quarter  compts    .  .  j<=lxxxxix  ti 

Mair  fra  the  litsters  .  .  .  .  .     vj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Jlair  fra  the  gairdners        .  .  .  .  .      iij  I1  vj  s.  viij  d. 

JIair  receavit  fra  ye  sds  13  deikins  for  ye  vse  and  behove  of  ye  scoolem'' 

jc'l  li  xij  s.  vj  d. 

Ite  the  compter  charges  himselfe  with  the  haill  sowmes  of  money  prin"  and 
arent  vphfted  be  him  fra  ye  persounes  particularlie  eftermentionat  quha 
was  awne  the  samyne  to  ye  hous  be  thair  severall  bands 

In  ye  first  fra  James  Scheills  of  prin"  sowm      .  bcvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Mair  fra  him  of  arent         .....     iiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 


286 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1650 


XXXVl] 


6s. 

13. 


Ixv  t  xvj  s. 
iij'^.x.xxiij  tl 
xxvj  li  xiij  E 


Item  of  prin"  sowme  for  ye  Laiid  of  Ederslie        .  iij^^xxxiij  li  6s, 

JIair  fra  him  of  arent         ...... 

Ite  recea\at  of  prin"  sowme  fra  ye  airs  of  vmq"  James  Smyth 

iij'^xxxiij 
And  of  arent  ..... 

Ite  of  prin"  sowm  fra  Robert  Findlay 

Mair  of  arent         ..... 

Ite  of  prin"  sowme  fra  John  Buchannan  . 

And  of  arent  ..... 

Ite  of  prin'i  sowme  fra  ye  Laird  of  Overpollock     . 
Ite  of  arent  and  of  expenss  of  Ires 
Ite  of  prin"  sowme  fra  ye  Countes  of  Eglingtoune 
And  of  arent  ..... 

Ite  of  prin"  sowme  fra  Thomas  Scot  James  Padie  and  WilUam  Wilsone 
i\Iair  of  arent         ....... 

Ite  of  prin'^  sowme  fra  Johne  Cumyng 

And  of  arent  ..... 

Ite  receavit  of  prin^'  sowme  fra  Johne  Wikone  eldir 
Mair  fra  him  of  arent  being  ane  zeir  and  a  qrter   . 
Ite  receavit  of  prin"  sowme  frae  Johne  Woddrow 
And  of  arent  ..... 

Ite  of  prin^i  sowme  fra  Mathow  Wilsone    . 

And  of  arent  ..... 


8d. 
xll 


Ite   receavit   of   piin"   sowme   frae   Johne   Adame 
Mair  of  arent  ..... 

Ite  receavit  of  prin"  sowme  frae  Duncane  Aikeine 
Ite  of  arent  ..... 


8d. 

8d. 

jell 

viij  d. 

6s.  8d. 

.  iiij  d. 

vc  t 

xvj  tl  xix  s. 

vj^lxv]  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

j<=v  I1  vj  s.  8d. 

iiij<=  1l 

XXX  1l 

iij'^xxxiij  li  6s.  8d. 

xxvij  li  IS.  4d. 

ij<:ll 

xvj  "h 

6s.  8d. 

xll 

6s.  8d. 

xix  tl 

j^xxxiij  ti  6s.  8d. 

xti 

ijc  ti 

xiij  ll 

ijcti 

xiij  li 

iiij  d. 

iiij  d. 

viij  d. 


j'^xxxiij  li 
j^xxxiij  ll 


Lxvj 


li  xiij  s 
xhij  s 
ji^xxxiij  li  vj  s. 

iiij  t  6s.  8d. 
iij<^xxxiij  ll  6s.  8d. 


Ite  of  prin''  sowm  fra  Piter  GemiU 

Mair  of  arent         ..... 

Ite  receavit  of  prin"  sowme  fra  Ritchard  Allane   . 

Mair  fra  him  of  arent         .... 

Ite  of  prin"  sowm  fra  Phillen  Snype 

Mair  of  arent         ..... 

Ite  receavit  of  prin"  sowm  frae  Johne  Bar 

Ite  receavit  fra  Johne  Tennent  in  name  of  Johne  Neisbit  for  half  ane  zeirs 

arent  of  500  li  .  .  .  .  .  x\j  li  vj  s. 

Ite  receavit  fra  Wilham  Clj'dsdaill  for  ane  qrters  arent  of  100  merk  .     j  li 

Ite  ye  comptar  chairges  himselfe  with  his  awn  gildrie  fyne  qlk  was  conforme 

to  ye  modificatioune   .  .  .  .  .  .  xl  ll 

Sufha  of  the  haill  chairge  is 

fy\'e  thousand  seivine  hundrethe  thrie  sco^  alevine  punds  xij  s. 


1650]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  287 

Dischairge. 

In  ye  first  ye  comptar  dischairges  himselfe  be  ye  sowme  fallowing  debursit  Compt. 
be  him  in  pairt  pay'  of  ye  hospitall  pairt  promited  for  its  pairt  of  ye  lands 
of  Gorballis  extending  to         .  .  .  .         iiij^^Jv^xxxiij  ll 

Ite  debursit  be  him  for  the  hospitall  pairt  for  the  outreik  of  Gorballs  extending 
to       .......  .  Iviij  1i 

Ite  debursit  be  the  comptar  to  ye  poor  men  in  ye  house  at  aught  severall  tymes 
in  ye  zeir  qrin  yr  was  somtyme  sax  sometyme  5  and  sometyme  4 

iji^lxiiij  ti 

Ite  debursit  to  ye  four  pensioners  for  the  tenne  of  Candilmes  1649 

xiij  ll  vj  s.  viijd. 

Ite  debursit  to  severall  poore  conforme  to  ane  warrand  xlix  ll  iv  s.  8d. 

Item  debursit  to  Johne  M<^Ben  for  his  supplic  be  ane  warrand        xiiij  li  x  s. 

Item  to  Androw  Lyill  by  warrand  .  .  vj  t  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  to  ye  scoolemaster    .....    j^xxxiij  ti  6s.  8d. 

Item  for  his  hous  maill      ......         xxiij  li 

Item  for  coalles  and  peitis  to  ye  poor  men  in  ye  house       .  .    xxj  ll  6d. 

Ite  to  ye  clerk  for  his  fiall  .  .  .  .  .  xx  ti 

Ite  for  plyding  to  be  hois  to  James  Bard  and  for  making  yof  xvj  s. 

Ite  for  ane  covering  to  Thomas  Quentaice  .  .  .  iij  li 

Mair  for  6  scheits  to  him  ....  Iiij  s.  iiij  s. 

Ite  debursit   to  ye  coUedge   collecto''  for   a   bursar  Ixvj  li  iij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  for  hfting  ye  meikle  kist  out  of  ye  hous  .  .  .  vj  s. 

Ite  for  hfting  ye  staines  of  the  old  zet       .  .  .  .  ij  s. 

Ite  for  ane  mort  kist  and  wining  scheit  to  James  Baird    .  .     iiij  li  x  s. 

Ite  to  his  wyi        .  .  .  .  .  .  .  iij  li 

Ite  to  a  mess''  for  charging  and  denunceing  of  Elderslie     .  •    j  li  xvj  s. 

Ite  for  ane  hand  to  ye  spaid  .  .  .  .  vj  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  for  fyve  pair  of  schoone  to  ye  poor  men  .  .  .  x  li 

Ite  for  fyve  foddome  of  towis  to  ye  bell  .  .  .       15s.   8d. 

Ite  to  Gabrell  Conynghame  for  ye  arent  awin  out  of  W"'  Mitchells  lands  dis- 
ponit  be  him  to  ye  hous  qrof  he  reservit  his  lyfrent  and  his  wyfes  and  for 
ye  termes  of  Witsonday  and  Mertimes  1649    .  .  viij  ll  x  s. 

Ite  to  Johne  WylUe  by  ane  warrand 

Ite  for  mending  of  ye  tangis 

Ite  for  ane  covering  to  Thomas  Nesmith  . 

And  for  sheits  to  him         .  .  .  .  .  ij  ti 

Mair  for  a  pair  of  schoone  to  him 

Ite  for  28  ellis  of  serking  cloath  to  4  men  in  ye  hous  at  7s.  6d.  ye  ell  is 

Ite  for  ye  mort  kist  and  windowing  sheit  to  Johne  Patersoune 

Ite  for  ane  iron  pot  to  ye  hous      .... 

Ite  debursit  for  making  ane  stand  of  claithes  to  Thomas  Nesmyth 


vj  ll 

iiij  s. 

3li 

13s.  4d. 

iji 

xli  xs. 

V  ll  iiij  s. 

2  li  XV  s. 

13s.  4d. 

288  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1650 

Ite  for  ane  trie  ladle  to  the  hous  ....  2s. 

Ite  to  William  Reid  for  chairging  and  denunceing  of  Ro'  Hoggiszard  xviij  s. 
Ite  debursit  to  Robert  Wilsoune  for  dressing  of  ye  muskets  in  ye  house  and 

twa  cleiks        .  .  .  .  .  .  .  vij  li 

Ite  mair  to  ye  sd  Johne  Wj'lhe      .  .  .  ij  ll  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  for  cloathe  to  be  ane  sark  to  Androw  Gray      .  .  j  li  viij  s. 

Ite  to  James  Elphistoune  for  mending  the  glase  windoes  .  .  j  ll 

Ite  for  twa  sarks  to  W"i  Mayne     .  .  .  .         ij  ti  xij  s.  vj  d. 

Ite  for  ane  mort  kist  and  wining  sheit   to  James  Caldwell        iiij  li  viij  s. 
Ite  debursit  for  taking  strae  and  dirt  out  of  ye  hous  .  ij  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  for  ane  hundrethe  daills  to  ye  hous      ....  Hiij  ll 

Ite  for  carj-eing  vpe  yrof  fra  the  Broomelaw   to  ye  hospitall  xlviij  s. 

Ite  for  hfting  and  caseing  of  yam  .  .  .  .  vj  s. 

Ite  for  ane  pair  of  schoon  to  Willia  Mayn  .  .  .  ij  ti 

Ite  to  James  Caldwells  wyf  .  .  .  .  .  iij  li 

Ite  to  Johne  Morisoune  for  ane  pairtchment  skine  to  wryte  ye  hous  securiteis 

on       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  XV  s. 

Ite  debursit  to  Patrik  Brjce  for  ye  vse  of  Androw  Gray  conform  to  ye  ordo'' 

of  ye  hous  for  his  fardir  supplie  .  .  .  .  vj  li 

Ite  debursit  for  ye  registra'une  of  Overpolloks  Ro'  Finday  and  M''  Niniane 

Campbells  band  and  raseing  of  Ires  yvpon       .  .  .  xij  ll 

Ite  to  Jeane  Lyoune  by  ane  warand  ....  viij  ll 

Ite  debursit  to  William  Reid  for  chairgeing  and  denunceing  of  Overpollock 

and  M''  Niniane  Campbell       .....  iiij  ti 

Ite   to   vmq"   Duncane   Semples  dochter   for  hir  supplie  viiij  ti  xiiij  s. 

Ite  for  a  pair  of  pott  boulles  .  .  .  .  .       iij  s.  4d. 

Ite  for  ane  waterpig  .  .  .  .  .  iij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  to  Androw  Gray  for  his  farder  supplie  conform  to  the  hous  ordo^'s  vj  li 
Ite  for  plyding  to  be  hois  to  W'"  Mayne  and  Jaes  Grahame  j  ll  x  s. 

Ite  for  ane  pair  of  scheits  to  W™  Mayn     .  .  ij  ll  xviij  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  for  removeing  ye  muskets  .....  xxxij  s. 
Ite  for  ane  lok  to  ye  bak  doir  .....  xviij  s. 
Ite  debursit  for  bigging  vpe  againe  of  ye  foir  zett  and  furneising  all  materiallis 

yto      .  .  .  .  .  .  .  hx  ll  i8s.  4d. 

Ite  debursit  to  ye  thrie  poore  men  yat  ar  to  be  sustenit  be  ye  hous  conform 

to  ye  ordo''  presciy  vit  and  gets  aff  ye  samyne  monethhe  ten  pundis  xvj  s. 

and  y'  for  ye  moneths  of  Ja""  Fe''  March  .\prylc  Maij  June  Juhj  August 

Sep''  and  Octo''  1650  extending  in  haill  to       .  .  .         3  ^^ viij  ll 

Ite  for  poynting  of  ye  house  .....  iiij  li 

Ite  for  fyfteine  cast  of  sklait  with  naills  and  fog   .  •     j  i  x^'j  s.  viij  d. 

Ite  debursit  to  Artho''  Takets  be  ordour  of  the  house  for  ane  zeirs  arent  of  100 

merks  he  advanced  for  ye  vse  yoi  the  tyme  he  was  coUecto'" 

iiij  li  vj  s.  viij  d. 


collector. 


1650]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  289 

Its  debursit  to  ye  deikin  conveaner  qlk  he  debursit  to  ye  clerk  quha  teuk 

seasing  of  ye  Gorballs  at  twa  severall  tymes  .             .          Iviij  s. 

Ite  debursit  be  ye  comptar  himselfe  at  severall  tymes  for  expenssis  at  recept 

of  ye  moneys  as  he  rcceavit  ye  samyne            .  .                 iiij  ll  xj  s. 

Ite   lent  out   to  W™  Clydisdaill   vpon   his   band  Ixvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  debursit  be  ye  comptar  to  mak  vpe  ane  sowme  y'  was  lent  to  ye  Laird  of 

Minto              .....  xxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Suma  of  the  haill  dischairge  is 

fy\'e  thowsand  sax  hundrethe  four  sco"^  fyve  punds  17s.  2d. 

Swa  charge  and  discharge  being  laid  and  calculat  the  comptar 

rests  awin  in  to  ye  hous  .  .  .  Ixxxv  li  xiiij  s.  x  d 

The  sd  day  be  pluraUtie  of  vottis  Johne  Scot  baxter  is  electit  and  nolat  Scott 
coUecto"'  to  ye  hous  for  ane  zeir  to  come  quha  being  present  accepted  ye  said 
office  in  and  vpon  him  and  gave  his  aith  as  vs  is  and  receavit  in  keeping  till 
ye  nixt  meitting  twa  dischargis  granted  be  j'e  coUedge  for  ye  burso''  and  ane 
granted  be  Gabrell  Conynghame. 

The  sd  day  Thomas  Campbell  producet  the  money  he  gat  fra  ye  burgess  Money 
yat  entered  ye  last  zeir  extending  to  thrie  scoi^  fyve  punds  7s.  4d.  qlk  was  givin  '^°  '^'^  °^' 
to  ye  coUecto"^  and  he  to  be  charget  ywith  at  ye  making  of  his  compt. 

The  sd  day  ye  clerk  and  officer  is  continowed. 

Fallowes  ye  inventar  of  ye  bands  belonging  to  ye  hospitall. 

Imprimis  be  Johne  Love  skinner  and  his  caors       .  .  .    ij''  merks.  Love. 

Qrof  yr  will  be  awin  of  arent  at  Mtimes  1650 — 13  zeirs. 

Ite  be  Androw  Lyill  talzo^  .  .  .  .  .  xl  li  LyUl. 

To  be  payit  at  Mtimes  1650  w'  (  ) 

Ite  be  vmq"  (  )  Hamiltoun  of  Bothuallhauche  and  M^  Johne  Bodiihauche. 

Dunlope  his  caor         .  .  .    ■  .  .  .   iij''  markis 

To  be  payed  at  Mtimes  1650  with  thrie  zeirs  arent. 
Ite  be  George  Lyoune  and  his  caor  .  .  .  .  iij'^  li  Lyoune. 

To  be  payed  at  Candilmes  1651  w*  twa  zeirs  arent. 

Ite  be  Ro*  Hoggiszaird       .  .  .  .  .  .    ij'-'  marks.  Hoggisyaird. 

To  be  payet  at  Mtimes  1650  w'  twa  zeirs  arent. 

Decimo  quinto  Novembris  1650. 

The  sd  day  the  pnta'un  to  the  bursarie  belonging  to  the  deikin  conveiner  Presmtadoun 
and  deikines  is  granted  to  Hendrie  Fausyde  sone  lau'i  to  vmqi'  William  Fausyd  pawf^d. 
baxt  burges  of  yis  bru'  dureing  ye  space  of  four  zeiris  furthe  and  fra  Michelmes 
last. 

T 


290 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1650 


Bandis 
producet. 


Baud 
Silvertounhill. 


Band 
Watsone. 


Scoo!  m'. 


Band  Mynto. 


Armes. 


Scott  and 
Currie. 


Andersone 
and  Merschell. 


Band 
producit. 


Prcnteis 
Ncilsone. 


The  sd  day  Walter  M<=Callae  producet  Johne  Tennents  band.  The  deikin 
of  wifars  producet  George  Lyones  and  John  (  )  bandis  and  Robert 

Boyd  producet  Robert  Hunter  and  Johne  Zoungs  band. 

The  same  day  ye  band  granted  be  ye  lait  Laird  of  Silvertounhill  for  fourtie 
pundis  with  Johne  Selkrigs  assigna~une  yrto  and  ordaines  Ro*  Wilsone  to 
speik  with  ye  zoung  Laird  of  Silvertounhill  yanent  and  to  report. 

The  sd  day  James  Watsounes  regrat  band  and  act  of  warning  yvpon  of 
twa  hundreth  marks  is  givin  to  ye  collector. 

The  same  day  it  is  appoyntit  ye  scoolemaster  to  have  ane  hundrethe  merks 
for  this  zeir  and  his  house  maill. 

The  sd  day  the  Laird  of  Mintois  band  of  fyve  hundrethe  marks  is  delyverit 
to  ye  collector. 

Quarto  Febriiarij  1651. 
The  sd  day  Williame  Reid  declared  that  Androw  Love  had  sent  to  him 
ane  musket  for  ye  vse  of  ye  hospitall  for  qlk  he  is  to  be  anserable  as  also  Walter 
M<^Callae  Ro'  Reid  Robert  Comyng  quha  wer  chosin  deikines  at  Michelmes 
1649  and  siklyk  \Mllia  Phillip  Jo"  Caldwell  Thomas  Campbell  ^^■™  Craig  are 
to  bring  in  y  swords  and  beltis  and  the  present  deikin  conveiner  is  to  bring 
in  (  ). 

The  same  day  Robert  Scot  maltman  and  Johne  Currie  talzo""  ar  baith  of 
y™  be  plurahtie  of  votts  admitted  and  receavit  w*in  the  sd  hospitall  and 
appoj'nted  to  be  enterteinzet  yin  as  twa  of  ye  sax  ordinar  poore  men. 

The  same  day  Thomas  Andirsoune  wivar  is  ordainit  to  get  the  mentin- 
ance  y'  Ro'  Scot  maltman  and  vmq"  Jonet  Thorn  gat  and  becaus  Hendrie 
Mschell  cordoner  was  not  thoght  fitting  at  yis  tyme  to  be  put  in  to  ye  hous 
for  his  supplie  it  is  ordanit  yat  ye  four  schilling  sterling  that  the  talzo's  paj-ed 
to  ye  sd  Jo"  Currie  is  now  to  be  payed  be  y""  to  ye  sd  Hendrie  Mschell  in  j-e 
moneth  and  ye  24s.  scots  yat  ye  sd  Ro'  Scot  gat  out  of  this  qrter  is  also  to  be 
paj'ed  monethlie  to  ye  sd  Hendrie  Mschell  for  his  supplie. 

The  same  da}?  Robert  Wilsone  producet  Silvertounhills  band  quhich  he 
gat  w'  ye  assigna~une  yrto  givin  to  ye  collector  and  ordaines  ye  collector  to 
put  Robert  Cumyngs  band  to  execu~un. 

Duodecimo  Martij  1651. 
The  sd  day  James  Neilsoune  sone  to  Johne  Neilsoune  in  Kirkintalloche 
is  buikit  prenteis  with  Johne  Neilsoune  maltman  dureing  the  space  of  fyve 
zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indentor  of  ye 
dait  of  yir  pnts. 


i65i]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  291 

Decimo  nono  Marti j  165 1. 
The  sd  day  Walter  Colquhoune  lau"  brother  to  Robert  Colquhoune  sone  Prenteis 
lau"  to  vmq"  Robert  Colquhoune  of  Baleirnick  is  buikit  prenteis  w'  Robert     °''"  °""" 
Reid  pnt  deikin  of  wrichtis  dureing  the  space  of  seivine  zeirs  as  prenteis  and 
twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indentor  of  ye  dait  ye  28  of  Nove'' 
1649  zeirs. 

12  Maij  1 65 1. 
The  said  day  the  dekine  convenar  with  ye  dekins  of  craft  being  convenit  Kingis  ma'". 
who  for  ye  most  p*  war  pnt  with  sindrie  of  y''  counsell  ane  Ire  being  red  direct 
be  his  ma""  to  ye  magratis  counsell  and  comunitie  of  yis  burghe  anent  ye 
advancement  to  him  of  500  punds  starling  beiring  dait  ye  nynt  of  yis  instant 
it  was  concludit  be  all  pnt  y*  it  sould  be  grantit  in  sua  far  as  it  had  rela'un 
to  yem  w '  ye  rest  of  ye  towne  and  for  yis  effect  appoynts  everie  dekine  to  meit 
w'  y  severall  tredis  yis  efternoone  and  to  tak  y  advys  how  ye  same  sail  be  most 
activlie  gon  about  and  ye  mo'^v  pro\ydit  and  to  report  yis  efternoone. 

The  said  da}-  ordanis  ye  collecto"'  to  give  to  James  Winzet  weifar  for  his  Warrand. 
supphe  four  punds  and  to  David  Robesone  (  ). 

Memorand. 
Ro*  Wilsone  delyverit  to  ye  collecto""  W™  Clyddisdall  band  of  ane  hundrethe  Bands. 
mks  and  M'  Niniane  Campbells  band. 

Octavo  Augustj  1651. 
The  sd  day  ordanes  the  colector  to  sicht  ye  poore  in  the  hous  anent  yair 
cloathes  and  to  report  ye  ni.xt  court  eftir  Michelmes. 

The  same  day  Johne  Tennentis  band  of  fyve  hundrethe  pundis  was  takine  Band  bo.xit. 
out  of  ye  box  and  givine  to  the  colector  and  he  gat  in  ane  new  band  granted  be 
ye  said  Johne  Tennent  contening  ye  sowme  of  thrie  hundrethe  and  fiftie  markis 
and  the  colector  is  to  be  chargit  with  ye  rest  of  ye  sd  500  h  and  arentis  yrof. 

Octavo  Octohris  1651. 
The  qlk  day  WiUiam  Ly'bodie  late  balyee  representing  now  ye  place  of  Lytbodie 
yc  late  deikin  conveiner  throw  the  deceis  of  vmq"  Piter  Johnston  with  ye  conveinar. 
deikins  of  craftis  and  mi's  of  crafts  quha  for  ye  maist  pairt  wer  pnt  being  con- 
veined  for  electing  thrie  persones  of  y""  number  to  be  presented  to  the  proveist 
baillees  counsell  and  vyi's  haveand  entres  this  day  to  the  effect  that  ane  of 
thame  may  be  electit  deikine  convener  of   yis    bru*  for  ye  zeir  to  come    be 
pluralitie  of  votts  yir  persones  fallowing  wer  chosin  viz 

William  Ly'bodie 

Thomas  Scott 

W">  Cotts 


292 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1O51 


and  ordanes  the  sd  Ij'te  to  be  presented  be  John  Glen  deikin  of  baxters  and 
Patrik  Bryce  deikin  of  wifars  and  yrefter  the  same  day  W'illiame  Ly'bodie 
being  electit  deikine  conveiner  for  ye  zeir  to  come  he  with  advyce  of  the  present 
deikins  of  craftis  and,  in  absence  of  some  of  them,  the  advyce  of  ye  old  deikines 
maid  choyse  of  ye  persones  fallowing  to  be  on  thair  counsell  for  ye  zeir  to  com. 


Johne  Pittilloche 
Robert  Boyd 
W"  Coattis  X 
Johne  Glen 
Patrik  Clerk 
Robert  Caldwell 
Johne  Hall 


William  Philp 
Robert  Wilsoune 
James  Duncane 
David  Robisone 
Gawin  Scott 

Patrik  Adame 
David  Scheirer 
Thomas  M'^Cuir 
James  Blair 
^\  "1  Knox 

Walter  M^Callae 
Thomas  Inglis 
Mathow  Wilsone 
Robert  Steine 
Johne  Coattis 

Thomas  Scot 
Johne  Buchannan 

Patrik  Bryce 
Johne  Falconer 

Andro  Muire 


Deikines 

Johne  Park  x 
James  Elphistone  x 
George  Brome 
Robert  Cumyng  x 
Phillen  Snype 
^^'"l  Craig 

Johne  Lindsay 
James  Dugall 

Thomas  Campbell 

Niniane  Gilhagie 
^^'alter  Bryce 
Andro  Colquhoune 
Patrik  Bryce 
Claud  Colquhoune 

Robert  Reid 
Alex"'  Dingwall 


Alex"'  Hohnes 
Robert  Brome 


Johne  Caldwell 
James  Padie 


Androw  Snype 
Robert  Snype 

Androw  Jape 
James  Broune 
Thomas  Lourie 


Johne  Bo)d 


1651]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  293 

17  November  165 1. 

The  said  day   William   Lv'bodie  deikine  conveaner  with  ye  deikins  of  Duncane 

"  .     .  collecot'. 

craftis  and  thair  brethreine  wha  for  ye  maist  pairt  war  put  \V'"  Zair  is  con- 

tinowit  clerk  and  be  pluralitie  of  votts  James  Duncane  hemerman  is  elect  and 

chosine  colector  to  the  house  for  ane  zeir  to  come  wha  being  present  accepted 

and  gave  his  aithe  as  vse  is. 

The  said  day  Johne  Scot  Lit  collector  maid  compt  of  his  haill  intromissioune  Compt  Scott 
with  ye  hospitallis  guids  the  zeire  preceiding  qrof  chairge  and    dischairge 
fallowes  and  first  the 

Charge. 

In  the  first  the  comptar  receavit  fra  Jo"  Lipar  late  collecto''  that  was  restand 

in  his  hands  at  ye  fitting  of  his  compt  .  Ixxxv  li  xiiij  s.  xd. 

Ite  receavit  be  him  fra  ye  said  Johne  Lipar  as  being  a  pairt  of  the  moneys 

that  was  payed  for  the  hospitalls  pairt  of  Gorballs  bot  was  light  and 

maid  vpe  againe  ....  j<^lviij  li  xj  s.  xd. 

Item  receavit  be  him  frae  Thomas  Campbell  that  was  gottine  frae  burgessis 

Ixv  ll  vij  s.  iiij  d. 
Ite  receavit  be  him  frae  Wilham  Raid  in  pairt  payment  of  ye  grund  auallis 

belonging  to  the  hospitall        .  .  .  .  .  xl  I1 

Ite  receavit  be  him  fra  ye  said  Thomas  Campbell  as  collecto''  to  ye  Gorbalhs 

as  a  pairt  of  the  housses  dews  .  .  Ixvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  receavit  fra  William  Mitchell  for  ye  few  dewties  of  his  hous  in  Drygait  ye 

Witsonday  and  Mtimes  termes  1649  and  1650  .  viij  ll  x  s. 

Ite  frae  Robert  Hall  for  ye  few  dewtie  of  his  house  1650  iiij  li   v  s. 

Ite  receavit  be  him  fra  John  Tennent  talzo''  in  part  pay'  of  j'e  500  li  that  was 

awin  be  him  to  ye  hous  .  .  .  ij^lxvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  receavit  be  him  fra  Wilham  Clydisdaill  .  Ixvj  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Mair  for  ane  zeirs  arent  yrof  .....  iiij  ll 

Ite  receavit  fra  Phillen  Snype  for  ye  auall  of  500  merks  fra  Witsonday  1650 

to  Witsonday  165 1      .  .  .  .  .  .  xx  ll 

Ite  receavit  be  him  fra  Johne   Bar   skynner  that  was  restand  of   ane  griter 

sowme  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  X  li 

Ite  receavit  frae  vmq"  Johne  Wilsone  elder  tanner  that  was  restand  of  some 

bygane  arentis  and  vy''s  y'  he  was  awin  to  ye  hospitall  .  xv  ti 

Ite  receavit  fra  Georg  Lyoune  for  the  arent  of  300  li  fra  Candilmes  1649  to 

Candlemes  last  ......       xxxvj  ti 

Ite  receavit  fra  ye  sd  Jo"  Tennent  for  ye  arent  of  ye  sd  500  ll  fra  Mtmes  1649 

to  Candlemas  last        .....  xxxvij  li  .x  s. 

Mair  receavit    be    him  for  ye  arent  of  350  merks  awin  now  be  him  to  ye  sd 

hospitall  fra  Candlemes  last  to  Lamas  now  last  bypast  .  vij  h. 


294  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1651 

Mair  receavit  be  him  of  quarter  compts  fra  ye  haill  deikines  litsters  and  gardners 

ij^ixli 
Mair   receavit   for   the   accompt   of   the   scoollemaster  Ixxvij  li  vj  s. 

Item  receavit  fra  Mathow  Rowand  for  his  gildbrother  fyne  .  1  li 

Suma  of  ye  haill  chairge  is 

ane    thowsand    twa    hundrethe    twentie    aucht    punds    5s. 

1228  li  5s. 
Discharge. 

In  ye  first  debursit  be  him  for  pasing  the  wryts  of  ye  Gorballis  conforme  to 

the  warrand  subscryvit  be  ye  deikin  cyveiner  .  xxviij  li  2S. 

Ite  debursit  to  Hendrie  Mschell  conform  to  ye  warrand     .  .  x  li 

Ite  deburst  to  men  in  the  house  at  ye  four  ordinar  termes  of  pay'  qrin  y  was 

sometyme  sax  and  sometyme  sevin     ....      ij'^bcix  li 
Ite  debursit  to  these  puire  wha  gettis  monethlie  mentinance  conform  to  ye 

ordo''  set  downe  yranent  and  compt  yof  red  and  allowit  j-is  last  zeir 

j'^xxij  li  viij  s. 
Ite  debursit  for  making  of  the  foir  zett  naills  yto  and  cullouring  of  the  samyne 

XV  li  iij  s. 
Ite  deburst  to  ye  scoolemaster  first  and  last  this  last  zeir  Ixx  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 
Ite  for  ane  kist  and  wining  scheit  to  vmq"  Johne  Allanesone  iiij  li  vij  s. 
Ite  spent  with  Jo"  Selkrig  quhen  Silvertounhills  band  and  assigna~une  was 

gottin  from  him  .  .  .  .  .  ■    ]  ^  viij  s. 

Item  deburst  to  Gabrell  Conynghame  for  ye  dewtie  he  mortifeit  to  ye  house 

for  the  terms  of  Witsounday  and  Mtimes  1650  .  viij  li  x  s. 

Item  deburst  to  vmq"  Androw  Gray  for  his  supplie       .  vij  li  xvj  s. 

Item  to  the  coUedge  collecto"'  for  twa  zeiris  dew  of  the  bursar  viz  1649  ^^^  1650 

j'^xxxiij  li6s.  8d. 
Item  for  ane  deid  kist  to  Jonet  Thome  who  was  one  to  whom  ye  hous  payed 

mentinance     .  .  .  .  .  .  j  li  xvj  s. 

Item  to  the  Laird  of  Bardowie  conforme  to  his  discharge  as  a  pairt   of   ye 

sowme  dew  for  ye  lands  of  Gorballs    .  .  .  .  uj<^  li 

Ite  for  45  ells  claith  to  be  sarks  to  the  poore  men  in  the  house  at  7s.  6d.  ye  ell 

inde  ......  xvj  li  xvij  s.  vj  d. 

Item  for  16  ells  of  claith  to  be  twa  paire  scheitts  to  these  who  wer  in  the  house 

at  7s.  ye  ell  is  .  .  .  .  .  v  li  xij  s. 

Item  for  6  pair  of  schoone  to  ye  6  poore  men  in  the  house  at  40s.  ye  pair    xij  li 
Item  for  ane  covering  to  Ro'  Scot  .  .  .  .  iij  li 

Item  for  strae  and  mending  ane  bed  ...  vij  s.  viij  d. 

Item  for  ane  kist  w'  sheit  to  Androw  Gray  .  .  iiij  li  vij  s. 

Item  for  ane  (  )  to  ye  house        ...  xij  s. 

Item  to  W"'  Zair  for  his  fiall  .  .  .  .  .  xx  li 

Item  deburst  for  laying  of  ane  sink  bringing  of  twa  laid  of  clay  yto  and  bringing 

some  clay  to  it  .  .  .  .  .  v  li  viij  s. 


i65il        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  295 

Item  to  Johne  Wyllie  cordoner      .  .  .  .  jti    xvj  s. 

Ite  to  ane  off^        ......  •  vj  s. 

Ite  to  George  Heriot  of  supplie      .  .  .  .  •  j  ^ 

Item  payed  out  be  ye  deikin  conveiners  warrand  for  haldin  Jo"  Riddell  at  ye 
scooll  .  .  .  .  .  •  •  X  s. 

Ite  to  John  Hall  for  ye  cureing  of  John  Wyllie  conform  to  ye  warrand     iiij  li 
Item  for  laying  ye  floore  in  ye  hous  .  .  .  .       x  li  x  s. 

Item  for  700  and  a  half  naills  yto  .  .  ■       vj  h  vij  s.  vj  d. 

Ite  for  foge  .  .  .  .  .  •  .  xij  s. 

Item  to  David  Robisone  bonatmakcr  and  Thomas  Weinyet  for  y^  supplie    viij  li 
Ite  for  ane  kist  and  wining  scheit  to  James  Grahame        .  iiij  li  vij  s. 

Ite  for  ane  c'oall  riddill  and  mending  ane  pair  of  tangis  xj  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  for  coalls  and  peits  to  ye  hous  .  .  .  xxiij  li  xj  s. 

Ite  the  comptar  wantis  the  sowmes  fallowing  fra  ye  skinners  of  qrt  compts    iij  li 
Mair  frae  thame  y'  was  dew  to  the  scoollemaster  .  .  .  v  li 

Ite  fra  ye  chirurgeons        .  .  .  .  .  •  ij  li 

Fra    ye  gardners    .  .  .  .  .  •  .  xx  s. 

Fra  the  litsters      .  .  .  .  .  .  .  xx  s. 

Fra  ye  bonatmakers  .  .  .  .  .  .  x  s. 

Suma  of  the  haill  dischairge  is 

ane  thowsand  ane  hundrethe  fourtein  punds  4s.  4d. 

Swa  chairge  and  dischairge  being  calculat  and  layd  the  comp- 
tar rests  awin  in  ane  hundrethe  fourtein  punds  8d.  qlk  they  ordain 
him  to  pay  to  ye  pnt  colecto'  and  because  he  hes  lost  be  crying 
down  of  ye  moneys  allevin  punds  8s.  qlk  is  rebaited  aff  ye  sd 
sowme  swa  rests  .  .  .  .  .      j''ij  li  xij  s.  8d. 

The  said  day  Robert  Wilsone  produceit  of  burges  silver  threttie  punds  Money 
8s.  lod.  qlk  was  delyverit  to  ye  colector  and  he  to  be  chairget  yw*.  ^^°  "'^''■' 

The  same  day  the  colector  producet  Johne  Gilkreis  band  of  ane  hundrethe  Bands 
pundis  for  his  gildrie  fyne     Item  ane  band  granted  be  Robert  Cumyng  of  ane  ''" 
hundrethe  merks  for  his  gildrie  fyne  qlks  wer  layd  in  ye  box. 

The  same  day  James  Weinzet  weifar  being  some  tyme  deikine  of  his  calling  Winzet  poore. 
is  admitted  and  receavit  as  ane  of  the  sax  men  in  the  house  and  ordanit  to 
be  menteined  yin  conform  as  the  rest  ar. 

The  said  day  Alex''  Scot  sone  to  Alex''  Scot  in  Drumgrahame  in  Neil-  Prenteis  Scott. 
stoune  is  buikit  prenteis  with  James  Harvie  to  serve  him  fyve  zeirs  as  prenteis 
and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentor  of  ye  dait  of  yir 
presentis. 


296 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [165 1 


Band  gevin  to 
ye  coUecto'. 


Band 
coUecto'. 


Money  gevin 
in  be  Reid. 


24  No'  1651. 
The  same  day  James  Watsones  band  of  twa  hundrethe  marks  is  givin 
to  the  colecto''  to  be  put  to  execu-une  with  Ro'  Cumyngs  band  qrin  Androw 
Love  is  cationer  for  ane  hundrethe  inks  and  was  to  be  payed  at  Mtmes  last 
w'  half  ane  zeirs  arent  and  Johne  Gilkreis  band  for  100  li  payed  also  at  the 
said  terme  with  ane  qrters  arent. 

Item  Silvertounehills  band  w'  ye  assigna~une  yto  givine  to  the  colector 
to  put  to  execu'une. 

The  sd  day  William  Reid  gave  in  to  the  colecto''  ten  punds  6s.  Sd.  qlk 
compleits  the  sowme  contenit  in  ye  rentall  and  qlk  sould  have  beine  payed 
to  Johne  Scot  last  colecto''  as  also  he  hes  payed  in  to  the  colecto'"  fourtie  four 
pundis  4s.  of  ye  rentall  qlk  was  receavit  be  him  at  a  mk  the  testane  conform 
to  ye  parUa's  ordo''s.  So  thair  is  lost  now  as  ye  money  goes  four  punds  8s.  4d. 
and  swa  the  colecto''  is  to  be  charget  onlie  with  threttie  nj'ue  punds  15s.  8d. 

The  sd  day  appoyntis  the  colecto""  to  give  to  (  )  the  monethlie 

contrabu'une  that  was  wont  to  be  payed  to  James  Lipars  mother. 


29  November  1651. 
Warrand  The  sd  day  the  deikin  conveaner  and  the  haill  deikins  q^  for  ye  maist 

andwy'poore.  pairt  vver  cyvent  they  contenowed  the  pay*  of  ye  scoolmasteris  fie  and  to  pay 
to  Johne  Fultoune  elder  skynner  thrie  pundis  and  to  (  )  Semple 

dochter  to  vmq"  (  )  Sempill  thrie  pundis  and  ordanes  the  colector 

to  hald  af  Thomas  Andersone  and  James  Ogilvie  ilk  ane  of  ym  twelf  schilling 
qlk  they  wer  wont  to  get  monethlie. 


Flemyng 
prenteis. 


Bannatyne 
prenteis. 


Prenteis 
Brown. 


Tertio  Decembris  1651. 
This  day  Macolm  Fleyming  sone  to  Macolme  Fleyming  of  Cardaroch  is 
buikit  prenteis  w'  \Mlliam  Gray  maltman  to  serve  for  fyve  zeirs  as  prenteis 
and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  fie  conform  to  ye  indento''  of  ye  dait  ye  19  of  No"^ 
last  by  was. 

Vigesimo  Decembris  1651. 
The  sd  day  Adame  Bannantyne  sone  tp  Adame  Bannantyne  in  Fleymington 
is  buikit  prenteis  w'  John  Dobbie  wifar  for  sevine  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa 
zeirs  for  meit  and  lie  conform  to  ye  indento''  ye  dait  of  yir  puts. 

13  Ja'  1652. 
The  sd  day  Robert  Broune  sone  lau"   to  Williame  Broune  sometyme 
indweller  in  Leithe  is  buikit  prenteis  w'  Daniell  Broun  chirurgeone  to  serve 
him  fyve  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeirs  for  meit  and  lie  conform  to  ye  indento'" 
of  ye  dait  ye  tent  of  Octo''  1648. 


1652I       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  297 

20  Ja">  1652. 

The  sd  day  the  deikine  conveaner  with  ye  deikins  of  hemermen  cord.  Poorboyes. 
wifars  coupers  flescho''s  maisso^  chirurgeons  bonatmakers  wreichtis  \v*  Jo" 
Lyndsay  for  ye  litsters  being  conveined  and  anent  ye  motione  maid  to  them 
be  ye  deikin  conveiner  at  cmand  of  ye  magistrats  and  coimsall  schewing  that 
they  wer  of  intentione  to  put  all  poore  boyes  born  wMn  yis  citie  to  tredis 
becaus  they  could  not  get  full  prenteis  fie  to  pay  w'  yame  it  was  desyred  be  ye 
counsell  that  it  micht  be  enacted  that  it  sould  not  be  prejudiciall  to  any  q^' 
wald  tak  any  of  yes  poore  boyes  to  tak  ane  vy""  prenteis  w'  ym  notwithstanding 
of  any  acts  of  anie  particular  craft  w'in  this  brut  that  nae  man  sould  tak  a 
prenteis  bot  on  in  ye  seivin  zeiris  and  yairfo""  ye  sd  deikine  convener  appoynted 
ye  sds  deikines  to  conveine  thair  craftis  and  give  anser  heirto  against  Fryday 
at  twa  eftemoone. 

23  Jar  1652. 

The  qlk  day  the  deikine  conveaner  haveing  met  with  the  haill  deikins  of  Poor  boyis. 
craftis  quha  for  the  most  p'  wer  present  he  requyret  ane  answer  of  ye  pro- 
positione  proponit  to  ym  anent  ye  puir  boyes  and  ye  haill  severall  deikins  of 
craftis  present  declared  that  the  haill  severall  craftis  declared  the  samyne  to 
be  ane  pious  and  comendable  work  anent  ye  poor  boyes  and  y''for  zeildit  to 
ye  forsd  proposi'une  proponit  to  ym  vpon  ye  20  of  yis  instat  and  also  statute 
and  ordainet  that  it  sould  be  lisome  to  any  honest  man  of  any  calling  q^^  sould 
tak  ane  of  ye  sds  poor  boyes  prenteis  to  tak  ane  vy^  quhenewer  he  had 
occasion  notwithstanding  of  y'  or  any  act  maid  in  ye  contrair  of  befoir. 

Decimo  sexto  Feb"'  1652. 
The  qlk  day  the  deikine  conveiner  w'  ye  deikins  and  y^  counsell  being  Bands 
conveined  Thomas  Campbells  band  for  ane  hundrethe  punds  granted  be  him  '^°'^'^'^'°'- 
for  his  gildrie  fyne  and  Johne  Park  visito''  of  maltmen  his  band  of  150  li  granted 
for  his  gildrie  fyne  ar  both  givin  to  ye  colecto""  and  he  is  to  be  charget  ywith 
and  siklyk  the  Laird  of  Mintois  band  of  500  merks  that  was  awin  to  the  talyo''s 
and  qlk  they  gave  in  to  the  house  to  be  allowed  as  a  pairt  of  thair  sowme 
obleist  to  be  payed  for  thair  proportionne  of  ye  landis  of  Gorballis  is  this  day  Taiizo'  band 
givin  bak  to  Robert  Boyd  deikine  of  talyors  to  be  soght  in  themselfis  fra  the  "'  ^°°  "''"'^^■ 
sd  Laird  of  Minto  in  respect  heirtofoir  thair  was  nae  assigna'une  maid  yto 
and  so  the  place  hes  no  power  to  cause  put  ye  samyne  to  execu'une  and  the 
sowm  is  to  be  payed  bak  to  ye  hous  w'  ye  bygane  arents  yof. 

The  said  day  the  f  oirsd  deikine  conveiner  deikins  of  crafts  and  thair  brethreine  Moneys  for 
taking  to  thair  considera~une  how  y'  the  haill  airmes  they  have  bein  acquyre-  ^'^™^^" 
ing  and  purchasing  all  thir  bygane  zeirs  and  wer  lying  in  the  hospitall  alse 
convenienthe  hid  and  put  out  of  ye  way  as  could  be  wer  all  seasit  vpon  be  ye 
Inglisch  and  takine  away  and  y''for  for  ye  better  help  and  supplie  of  ye  poor 
they  have  statute  and  ordainit  that  money  sail  be  takine  now  for  airmes  and 


298 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1652 


Band  for 

corslet  ts. 


Weifetis. 


Poor  boyis. 


Decon 

convenar 

lytts. 


ye  samy  to  be  distribute  for  ye  weell  of  ye  poore  and  everi  new  deikin  y'  was 
appoynted  of  befoir  to  give  in  ane  sword  and  ane  belt  to  pay  aucht  pundis 
and  everi  new  deikin  cyveiner  to  pay  twelf  pundis  and  ordaines  all  that  ar 
awin  for  byruns  pay  the  samy  w*in  aucht  dayes  and  it  is  to  be  rememberit 
that  thir  persounes  fallowing  viz  Walter  M^'Callae  Ro'  Reid  Ro'  Cumyng 
\\m  piip  Thomas  Campbell  Jolm  Caldwell  John  Pittilloch  John  Glen  Jo" 
Park  Jaes  Elphistoun  Phillen  Snype  ar  all  awin  y  dews. 

The  sd  day  as  concerning  the  corsletts  that  wer  lent  out  heir  lor  ye  \'se 
of  ye  associa~une  the  deikin  cyveiner  produced  ane  not  subscryvit  be  Capitane 
Johne  Conyngha  for  redelyverie  bak  againe  of  four  of  these  corseletts  that 
war  lent  him  and  ane  not  granted  by  Neill  M<^Cuir  for  delyverie  of  on  he  gott 
and  John  Colquhonis  not  for  ane  vy''  qlk  war  put  in  ye  box. 

The  said  day  anent  the  grivance  givin  in  be  the  dekin  of  wifaris  anent  the 
plurahtie  of  weivars  in  GorbalUs  qrby  the  haill  brethreine  of  the  weivars 
within  this  bni'  ar  lyklie  to  be  turned  beggers  is  to  be  rememberit  and 
appoyntis  George  Broune  James  Elphistoun  John  Hall  Ro'  Cummyng  and  Ro' 
^^'ilsoune  to  meit  w*  ye  deikin  of  wifars  and  such  as  he  sail  bring  w'  him  to 
advyce  vpon  ye  best  and  fittest  remedye. 

The  said  day  it  is  aggreid  and  condiscendit  be  the  haill  deikines  wha  for 
ye  maist  p'  wer  pnt  that  the  haill  puir  boyes  put  to  treads  be  ye  towne  sail  be 
all  buikit  in  thair  severall  craftis  bulks  as  prenteiss  frie  without  pay'  of  any 
kynd  of  moneyis. 

Qninto  Aprilis  1652. 

The  sd  day  thair  being  conveined  in  the  crafts  hospitall  conforme  to  ye 
appoyntment  of  ye  magistratis  and  counsall  the  dekins  of  heiriermen  talyoi's 
chirurgeons  coupers  flescho''s  baxters  wifars  massons  bonatmakers  and  with 
them  ^^'alter  Neilsoune  balzie  W"  Neilsoune  James  Colquhoune  ]\Ianasses 
Lyill  Andro  Muir  Artho''  Takets  Johne  Miller  James  Dugall  Adame  \A'ilsone 
Alex''  Holmes  Alex"'  Jafrae  Johne  Gilhagie  Androw  and  Ro'  Snyps  Johne 
Falconer  John  Buchannan  Thomas  Lourie  James  Miller  talyo"'  John  Boyd 
Ro'  Brone  George  Park  heiiierman  John  Patson  John  Lyndsay  litster. 

The  said  day  the  said  Walter  Neilsoune  being  electit  preces  of  ye  sd 
melting  and  ye  forsds  psones  abovenameit  cyveinid  taking  to  thair  consider- 
a~une  that  it  was  ordanit  be  the  magistrats  and  counsall  that  ane  new  lyt 
sould  be  set  downe  to  be  pnted  to  them  for  electing  of  ane  new  deikin  conveiner 
and  thrie  severall  lytes  being  chosin  furthe  ilk  lyk  [?  lyte]  cj'teining  thrie 
psouns  thair  was  ane  choyseing  out  of  ilk  lyte  to  mak  vpe  ye  number  of  thrie 
viz  Manasses  Lyill  James  Colquhoun  and  John  Miller  wer  electit  and  chosin 
to  be  put  on  lyte  and  to  be  presented  to  j'e  magistrats  and  counsell  and  vy^s 


1652]   RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


299 


haveing  entres  that  ane  of  them  may  be  chosine  deikin  cyvener  of  yis  bru' 
to  the  nixt  ordinar  tym  of  election  efter  Michelmes  nixt  and  appoynts  ye  sd 
lyte  to  be  pnted  be  ye  deikin  of  hemermen  and  Jo"  Buchanan. 

The  same  day  the  forsd  Manasses  Lyll  was  electit  deikin  cyvener  dureing 
ye  space  forsd  and  thairefter  made  chose  of  ye  psouns  fallowing  to  be  on  his 
counsell. 


Johne  Pittilloch 
Robert  Boyd 
Johne  Wilsoun 
John  Glen 
Patrik  Clerk 
Robert  Caldwell 
Johne  Hall 


Artho^  Taccatts 
Alex''  Jafra 
James  Duncan 
David  Robisoun 
Gawin  Scott 

Johne  Miller 
David  Sheirer 
Johne  Birscat 
Ro*  Carruthers 
Wm  MiUer 

Johne  Andirsoun 
Gabrell  Corbet 
Adame  Wilsoune 
David  Clerk 
W"  Findlay 

John  Buchannan 
James  Robiesoun 

Johne  Patersoune 
Johne  Falconer 
W"  Falconer 

Androw  Muir 
Johne  Boyd 


James  Morisoun 
W"  Reid 
George  Brome 
Ro'  Cumyng 
Phillane  Snype 
Wm  Craig 


Walter  Neilson  balzie 


William  Neilsoune 
Androw  Mudie 
Johne  Muir 
Johne  Miller 
Johne  Weir 

Johne  Danizell 
Robert  Bell 


Alex^  Holmes 
Ro*  Broome 

James  Padie 
Johne  Caldwell 


Androw  Snype 
Robert  Snype 

Androw  Jape 

Johne  Lyndsay 
James  Brown 

James  Dugall 
Thomas  Loury 


300 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1652 


Four  persones 
on  ye  deane  of 
gilds  coimsell. 


Decimo  sexto  Aprilis  1652. 

The  qlk  day  the  deikine  conveaner  deikins  of  craftis  and  the  maist  pairt 
of  yf  counsell  wha  war  present  being  conveined  for  electing  of  four  of  thair 
number  to  sit  on  the  dean  of  gilds  counsell  in  name  of  ye  haill  craftis  conform 
to  the  ancient  custome  q"  Michelmes  nixt  and  the  haill  persounes  deikins 
and  remanent  counsell  being  put  in  four  lytes  for  y'  effect  and  removit  vicissim 
be  pluralitie  of  votts  thir  four  persounes  wer  electit  and  chosine  to  the  effect 
forsd  viz  William  Neilsoun  maltman  John  Andirsoune  tanner  Johne  Miller 
lalyo''  and  George  Brome  flescho''. 


Prenteis 

Clyddisdall. 


Scoll. 


Reid. 


Kies 


29  Aprylle  1652. 

The  sd  day  Thomas  Clydisdaill  sone  lau"  to  Thomas  Clydisdaill  indweller 
in  this  bru'  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Johne  Boyd  maissoune  for  ye  space 
of  seivine  yeiris  conforme  to  ye  indentoi"  of  ye  dait  ye  last  day  of  Nover  1649 
zeirs. 

Tent  day  of  Maij  1652. 

The  sd  day  in  answer  to  Johne  Patersoune  scooUmaister  his  complaint 
appoyntis  Walter  Neilsone  balzie  George  Broome  Patrik  Clerk  Johne  Patsone 
and  Johne  Weir  to  visie  his  scoolle  at  ye  wyndheid  and  to  try  quhat  poore 
ones  ar  instructed  thairine  quha  ar  not  able  to  pay  thair  scolledge. 

The  same  day  for  certaine  guid  reasones  and  consideratiounes  knowne  to 
ye  deikin  conveiner  deikins  of  craftis  and  thair  brethreine  of  counsell  they  doe 
heirby  remit  to  \\''"  Reid  officer  the  sax  punds  saxtein  schilUng  that  he  was 
awin  in  to  ye  hous  and  speciallie  in  satisfactioun  of  cloathes  he  wants  y'  was 
promeist  him. 

The  same  day  the  keys  of  ye  boxe  wer  givine  to  ye  deikins  of  hemermen 
talyoi's  cordoners  and  visito''  of  maltmen. 


Prenteis 
Hunter. 


Prenteis 
Glendunyng 


The  joitrlein  of  June  1652. 

The  sd  day  Johne  Hunter  laufull  sone  to  vmq"  Johne  Hunter  travillo'' 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  to  W"  Fergussoune  tailyour  for  fyve  yeirs  and  twa 
yeirs  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indento''  of  ye  dait  the  twelt  day  of 
Junij  instant. 

Fyft  of  August  1652. 

The  same  day  Williame  Glenduning  sone  to  Johne  Glenduning  in  Leithe 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  Williii  Scliaw  maissone  for  seivine  yeirs  as  prenteis 
and  twa  veirs  for  meit  and  fie. 


1652]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  301 

Nono  Augustj  1652. 

The  sd  day  appoyntis  George  Broome  [and]  Johne  Hall  to  meit  w'  ye  deikin  Naper. 
conveiner  and  the  thrie  to  meit  \v'  ye  airs  of  Johne  Naper  and  try  quhat  thej' 
will  give  to  the  hous  for  ane  hundrethe  mks  prin''  and  tvventic  yeirs  arent 
they  ar  awin  yto. 

7  September  1652. 

The  sd  day  Mathow  Ljmdsay  wiefar  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  w*  Androw  Prenteis 
Barbour  weivar  dureing    ye  space  of  fyve  x'eirs  as  prenteis  and  two    yeirs     ^"  ^^^' 
yrefter  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indentor  of  yis  dait. 

13  September. 

The  said  day  be  pluralitie  of  votts  \\'illiam  Neilsone  and  Johne  Miller  Lyill 
tah'of  wer  electit  to  be  put  on  lytc  with  Manasses  Lj'ill  present  deikin  con- 
veiner and  to  be  presented  to  the  counsell  to  ye  effect  ane  of  thame  micht  be 
electit  deikin  cj-\-einer  for  y'  yeir  to  cume  and  the  sd  Manasses  Lyill  being 
conteinowit  deikin  cyveiner  thir  persones  following  wev  maid  choyse  of  to  be 
on  his  counsell  viz 

Artho"'  Taccatts  Johne  Miller 

William  Fergussoun  Ro'  Reid  elder 

Gabrell  Corbet  Georg  Broome 

Johne  Buchannan  Robert  Cumyng 

Patrik  Clerk  Phillen  Snj'pe 

Johne  Stewart  yo''  Androw  Jape 
Johne  Hall 

Walter  Neilsone  bailie 

James  Duncane  W"^  Neilsone 

Alex''  Jafrae  Johne  Weir 

Gawin  Scott  James  Moriesone 

George  Park  Androw  Mudie 

David  Robison  John  Muir 

Robert  Boyd  W™  Reid 

John  Miller  Robert  Bell 
David  Scheirer 

Ro'  Caruthers  James  Padie 

John  Ker  John  Caldwell 

Johne  Wilsone 

John  Lystone  elder  Alex''  Holmes 

Adame  Wilsoune  Ro*  Banks 


302  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [165: 

W'm  Findlay 

David  Clerk  Androw  Snype 

Ro*  Snype 
Johne  Glen 
Johnc  Buchannan  yo""  W'"  Craig 

Alex""  Parker 
Johne  Patersone  Johne  Lyndsay 

Johne  Falconer 
W"'  Falconer 
Robert  Caldwell  Ro'  Hutchesone 


James  Dowgall 


Daniel  Brown 


14  October  1652. 

The  same  day  the  deikine  conveiner  deikins  of  crafts  and  thair  brethrein 
being  conveinit  for  electing  four  of  thair  number  to  sitt  on  ye  deane  of  gilds 
counsell  for  3'e  yeir  ensewing  be  pluralitie  of  votts  thir  persones  fallowing  wer 
electit  viz  Williame  Neilsone  Johne  Miller  tah'o''  Robert  Cumyng  skiner  and 
George  Broome. 

Quinto  Novembris  1652. 

The  sd  day  James  Duncane  late  colecto''  maid  his  compt  qrof  chairge  and 
dischairge  is  as  fallowes. 

Chairge. 

Imprimis  receavit  fra  the  13  deacones  of  qrter  compts  conform  to 

ye  ordo''        .......     199     o    o 

Ite  fra  ye  gardners  .  .  .  .  .  .368 

Ite  fra  the  litsters  .  .  .  .  .  .         6  13     4 

Ite  receavit  fra  W™  Reid  qlk  compleitis  ye  rentall  ye  yeir  Johne 

Scot  was  colecto""      .  .  .  .  .  .       10    6    8 

M'  receavit  fra  him  cyform  to  ye  act  of  ye  dait  ye  24  of  Octo"' 

last  .  .  .  .  .  .  •       39  15     8 

Ite  receavit  fra  the  late  colecto''  that  was  in  his  hands  at  ye  making 

of  his  compt  ..... 

Ite  receavit  fra  Ro'  Wilson  of  burgess  silver 
Ite  fra  the  chirurgeones  that  was  awin  to  ye  last  colecto^ 
Ite  fra  \'e  bonatmakers  for  ye  lyk  .  .        '     . 

Ite  fra  John  Gilchreis  for  his  gildrie  fyn 
Ite  fra  him  of  arent       ..... 
Ite  fra  ye  skinners  y^  v\as  awin  to  ye  last  colecto"' 
W  fra  ye  sd  Ro'  Wilson  of  burgess  silver 


102  12 

0 

30  8 

10 

2   0 

0 

0  10 

0 

100   0 

0 

I  13 

0 

6  6 

8 

9  19 

4 

1652]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


303 


Ite  receavit  fra  John  Park  for  his  gildrie  fyne 

Ite  receavit  fra  Ro'  Cumyng  for  ye  arent  of  ye  100  mks  awin  to  ye 
hous  ...... 

Ite  fra  Johne  Tennent  of  arent    .... 

Ite  fra  ye  proveist  for  the  hospitalls  pairt  of  sume  venture  salt 
cam  in  .....  . 

Ite  fra  Phillen  Snype  of  aual  rent 

Ite  fra  Thomas  Campbell  for  his  gildrie  fyne 

M'  fra  him  for  ye  musket  he  was  awin 

Ite  receavit  fra  Ro^  Hunter  of  Whytsyd  for  thrie  zeirs  arent  of  ye 
sowm  awin  be  him 

Item  receavit  fra  George  Russell  for  his  gildrie  fyne 

Ite  receavit  fra  the  haill  dcikines  for  ye  scoollmaster     . 

Ite  receavit  fra  ye  severall  deikines  the  sowmes  fallowing  to  ane 
compt  to  helpe  to  pay  the  aual  rent  of  ye  sowmes  awin  yet 
be  ye  Gorballs  and  first  fra  ihe  cordoners  8  'S  17s.  fra  ye 
maltmcn  80  h  fra  ye  hemennen  13  li  m'  fra  ye  maltmen  40  ll 
fra  ye  talyo''s  40  li  fra  ye  weivars  18  t\  fra  ye  couperis  16  tl 
mair  fra  ye  hefhermen  13  ti 


100     o     o 


4 

0 

0 

•   14 

0 

0 

.   66 

13 

4 

20 

0 

0 

.  100 

0 

0 

8 

0 

0 

e 

.   bo 

12 

0 

.  116 

13 

4 

•  77 

6 

0 

Suma  of  ye  haill  charge  is 

ane  thowsand  thrie  hundreth  aucht  punds  i8s.  6d. 


288 


50 

0 

0 

15 

15 

0 

18 

6 

8 

Discharge. 

In  ye  first  debursit  to  ye  sax  poor  men  in  ye  hous  at  48  ll  ye  peice 
in  ye  yeir  ...... 

Ite  debursit  for  twentie  ells  of  claith  at  45s.  the  ell  and  lor  15  ells 
hardine  at  6s.  8d.  the  ell      inde        .... 

Ite  debursit  for  42  ellis  of  sarking  claith  at  7s.  6d.  ye  ell  . 

Ite  for  coalls  and  peitis  ..... 

Ite  deburst  to  James  Ogilvie  Hendrie  Mschell  Johne  Fultoune 
Thomas  Andersone  and  Margret  Da\'ison  nyntcin  schilling 
sterling  ilk  moneth  qrof  James  Ogilvie  4  Hendrie  Mschell  6 
Thomas  Andersone  4  Johne  Fultoune  4  Margrat  Davison  i 
inde 

Ite  debursit  to  the  scooUemaster 

Mair  for  his  hous  maill 

Ite  to  the  clerk 

Ite  to  ye  relict  of  Gabrell  Conyngha 

Ite  be  warrand  to  Johne  Fultone  and  ( 

Ite  debursit  for  the  house  and  ye  rest  of 

of  aual  rent  for  y'  awne  zet  to  ye  Gorballis  to  ane  compt     .     280     o     o 


13O  lO 

0 

93  6 

8 

24  0 

0 

20  0 

0 

8  10 

0 

)  Semple 

6  0 

0 

f  ye  deikins  to  ye  towne 

304 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1652 


Duncanc 
collecto'. 


Scoole. 


Keis. 


4 

10 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

6 

8 

2 

18 

0 

2 

18 

0 

10     o 


II     8    8 


13 
o 


6 
II 


Ite  debuisit  for  making  the  poor  folkis  fyve  stand  of  claithes     . 

Ite  for  5  par  of  schoon  to  y'"      . 

Ite  for  ane  pair  of  schoon  and  hoes  to  James  Weinyet  ye  saxt  of 
ym  ....... 

Mair  of  chiiitie  to  Cuthbert  Robisone      .... 

Ite  to  Hendrie  Mschell  ..... 

Ite  debursit  to  Johne  Balyie  Johne  Wylhe  the  sd  Cudbert  Robison 
Jaes  Cudbert  bonetmaker  and  James  Syme  at  Beltane  last 
conforme  to  j^e  warrand       ..... 

Ite  debursit  at  Lambes  last  to  ye  sd  Johne  Wyllie  James  Madder 
the  sd  Jeane  Cudbert  Janet  Hutchesoune  Geills  Gemill 
Margret  Cochrane     ...... 

Ite  to  ye  relict  of  vmq"  Johne  Naper  qlk  is  to  be  allowit  to  ye 
house  w*  the  rest  of  ye  sowme  awin  be  his  aires 

Ite  debursit  for  mending  ye  poore  folks  pan  and  lok 

Suma  of  ye  wholl  dischairge  is 

nyne  hundreth  four  scoir  nyntein  punds  4s.  8d. 

And  swa  rests  awin  in  be  ye  compter  thrie  hundrethc  nyne  punds 
3s.  lod. 

The  same  day  the  forsd  James  Duncane  is  of  new  again  electit  and  chosine 
collectQi"  for  ye  yeir  to  come  and  because  the  house  is  zet  awin  som  moneys 
for  its  pairt  of  ye  lands  of  Gorballs  ordaines  him  to  seik  in  the  haill  moneys 
awin  to  ye  hospitall  to  the  effect  the  saym  may  be  pa^'ed  and  to  spare  nae 
man  q'somevir  yanent.  Lykas  ye  same  day  he  producet  Silvertounhills  band 
qlk  was  put  in  ye  box. 

The  sd  day  appoynts  the  balyie  Walter  Neilsone  to  mak  ane  new  visite 
againe  of  the  scoolle. 

The  sd  day  the  deikines  of  hemermen  talyo''s  cordoners  and  visitor  of 
maltmen  receavit  the  keyis. 


Fallowis  the  inventar  of  the  bands  belonging  to  the  crafts  hospitall. 

Imprimis  be  Androw  Lyll  tailzof   .  .  .  .  .  40 11 

Bodiihauche.    Item  be  vmq'^  (  )  Hamiltone  at  Bothwellhaugh  as  prin'i  and  M"" 

Jo"  Dunlope  his  ca''  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  1652  w'  5  ye''s  arent 

iij<=  merks 

Lyouii.  Item  be  George  Lyoun  and  his  ca''  to  be  payit  at  Candlemes  1652  w'  2  ye's 

arent  ........    iij'=  merks 

Hoggiszaird.     Item  be  Robert  Hogiszaird  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  1652  with  4  ye'"s  arent 

ij"^  merks 


1653]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  305 

Item  be  James  Watsomie  and  his  ca^  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  1652  w*  7  yei's  Watsone. 

arent  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  •     ij'^  merks 

Item  be  Johne  Tennent  and  his  ca^  to  be  payit  at  Candlemes  nixt  with  ane  half  Tennent. 

zeiris  an\\al  rent  ....         ij'^.xxxiij  ll  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  thair  is  ane  band  grantit  be  j\I''  Ninian  Campbell  and  his  Gal's  of  the  sowme  Campbell. 

of  four  hundreth  fourtie  eight  merks  in  the  qlk  the  ane  hundreth  punds 

that  wes  awand  of  befoir  be  the  sd  M''  Ninian  is  includit  of  the  qlk  sowme 

of  448  merkis  thair  belongis  to  ye  cordouners  278  merkis  qrof  ye  anwall 

rent  is  awin  sen  ye  dait  of  ye  band. 
Item  be  Johne  Miller  tailzof  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  1652  \v'  4  ye'^s  arent       Millar. 

iiij<^  merks 
Item  be  Robert  Hunter  of  Whitsyd  as  prin"  and  WiUia  Wallace  of  Faill  as  Hunter. 

ca"'  for  him  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  frie  w'out  anwal  rent        iij<^xliij  li 
Item  ane  band  grantit  be  Ro*  Comyng  as  prin''  and  Andro  Love  as  ca"^  for  him  Cumyng. 

to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  1652  \v'  half  a  ye^'s  arent  .  j<=  merks 

Item  ane  band  grantit  be  the  vmqie  Laird  of  Silvertounhill  of  fourtie  punds  Silvertounhill. 

money  and  ane  assigna~un  thairto  q''of  will  be  awand  at  Mertimes  1652 

thriteine  yei's  arent. 
Item  thair  is  to  be  wphftit  out  of  thes  lands  at  ye  Drygate  porte  belonging  to 

W™  Mitchell  and  Ro'  Hall  qlk  was  mortified  to  ye  house  be  vqle  Gabriell 

Conynghame  .....  viij  "h  x  s. 

Olli  is  awand  for  ye  tmes  of  Witsonday  and  Mertimes  1651,  1652. 
Ite  awin  be  Johne  Young  merchand  and  Phillane  Snype  fyve  hundrethe  marks  Zoung  and 

mo^y  to  be  payit  at  Mertimes  1652  w'  half  ane  zeiris  anwal  rent.  °^'''^" 

The  deikine  of  ye  wrightis  delyverit  on  ye  7'  of  De^  1652  to  the  town  MemoranduHi 
thesaurer  twa  hundrethe  merks  to  be  givin  to  Sir  Robert  Douglas  in  name  of      "^  '^' 
his  craft  qlk  with  ye  800  ffiks  was  payit  of  befoir  compleits  the  1000  mks  that 
was  promeist  to  be  payit  for  thair  proportionall  p'  of  ye  GorbaUs. 

7<  of  FelfiJ  1653. 

The  said  day  thir  persones  viz  \\'illiam  Neilsoune  the  deikins  of  heihermen  ..Vaent  ye 
talyours  visitor  of  maltmen  Adame  \Mlsone  and  the  colector  ar  appoyntit  to  estl^f  o°/ve^ 
meit  and  conveine  be  themselfe  and  to  tak  notice  of  ye  conditioune  of  ye  hous  ^°^^- 
and  quhat  yr  is  awne  for  its  proportionall  pairt  of  the  lands  of  Gorballis  and 
what  guid  debtt  is  awne  to  the  hous  to  the  effect  that  so  muche  yrof  may  be 
gottin  in  betwixt  and  Whitsonday  for  compleiting  what  sould  be  payed  to 
Sir  Ro'  Douglas  for  ye  Gorballs  and  that  ye  conditione  of  ye  hous  may  be 
ye  better  kno\vn  and  to  mak  report  heirof  the  nixt  meitting. 

The  same  day  be  plurahtie  of  vottis  its  thoght  guid  the  scoollmaster  be 
dischargit  efter  Beltane  nixt  and  his  fiall  discharget  yrefter. 
U 


3o6 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TR.\DES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1653 


CoUecto' 
mo''. 


Warrand. 


Armes. 


Warrand. 


Rodger. 


Warrand. 


Cumyng 
prenteis. 


Bands  takine. 


The  same  day  William  Reid  maid  compt  of  ye  aualls  awine'to  the  hous 

as  fallowes  and  ye  rentall  being  fiftie  sax  pundis  four  s.  qrof  he  hes  now  payit 
to  ye  colector  fiftie  punds  5s.  (becaus  yr  is  15s.  to  be  payit  be  W™  Conyngham 
officer  qlk  cannot  be  gottin)  and  that  for  the  yeir  165 1  as  also  hes  payit  to  ye 
collector  aught  pundis  los.  for  W™  Mitchells  pairt  of  ye  few  dewti  mortifeit 
be  Gabrell  Conynghame  and  four  pundis  5s.  qlk  he  receavit  fra  Ro'  Hall  for 
his  pairt  of  the  sd  few  dewti  the  zeir  1651  extending  in  haill  to  ye  sowme  of 
three  scoir  three  punds  and  ordaines  the  collector  to  be  chargit  yrwith. 

The  said  day  ordanis  the  colector  to  pay  to  Johne  Gray  sone  lau"  to 
vmqii  Ro'  Gray  talyo''  twentie  merkis  to  helpe  to  put  him  to  ane  craft. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  conveiner  deikins  of  craftis  and  thair  counsell 
taking  now  to  thair  considera'un  the  waiknes  of  ye  hous  and  how  that  the 
poor  cannot  be  supplied  yby  as  wont  to  be  and  that  be  former  acts  it  is  ordanet 
that  all  ye  moneys  receavit  fra  ye  deikin  conveaner  and  deikins  sail  be  imployed 
for  ye  poore  it  is  thairfor  this  day  inactit  statute  and  ordanit  that  nae  new 
deikine  conveiner  or  deikins  be  permitted  to  keip  any  meittings  or  counsell 
before  they  pay  to  ye  collector  thair  dewis  for  thair  armes  and  ordaines  the 
colector  to  persew  all  these  who  are  zet  awin  for  airms  for  ye  good  of  ye  poor 
and  to  begin  ye  morne. 

The  sd  day  ordanis  the  colector  to  pay  to  vmq"  Alex^  Woodis  sone  to 
helpe  him  to  ane  craft  quhen  he  is  bund  yto  ten  punds  and  gif  he  goe  to  ye 
pack  to  get  nothing. 

The  sd  day  finds  that  James  Rodger  sone  to  vmq"  James  Rodger  may 
serve  as  ane  jurneyman  being  ane  burges  sone  and  satisfeit  his  m''. 

The  said  day  ordaines  the  collector  to  pay  to  vmq''  James  Millars  wyie 
haveing  four  bairnes  and  broght  to  bed  with  the  fyft  twenty  merks  and  that 
sowme  with  vther  smalls  debursit  to  him  and  vy'  poore  folkis  contenit  in  ye 
roll  givin  to  ye  collector  extends  to  xlvij  li  xvj  s. 

Octavo  Felf»  1653. 
The  said  day  Robert  Cumyng  sone  to  vmq"  Robert  Cumyng  in  Langhous 
Park  of  Eistwood  is  buikit  prenteis  with  Robert  Cumyng  glover  dureing  the 
space  of  sevine  zeirs  conforme  to  ye  indentor  of  ye  dait  j'e  7  of  Julij  1648  zeirs. 

4  Marche  1653. 
The  said  day  the  bandis  fallowing  ar  takine  out  and  delyverit  to  ye  persones 
fallowing  to  get  in  the  money  or  then  to  put  y™  to  execu*un.  Ite  Johne  Miller 
maltman  Ro'  Hodgiszards  band  of  200  inks  and  Johne  Tennents  of  250  iliks 
to  Georg  Broome  M"^  Niniane  Campbells  band  of  448  iiiks  and  George  Lyones 
300  "li  to  ye  collector  Phillen  Snyps  and  Ro*  Hunters  Botliellhauchs  band  to 
Artho"'  Taccats  Johne  Millers  and  Ro'  Cumyngs  y  bandis. 


1653]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  307 

Secundo  Maij  1653. 

The  sd  day  it  is  concludit  that  the  prin"  sowmes  awine  be  Robert  Hogis-  Sowmes 
zard  and  Georg  Lyoune  be  continowit  till  Mertimes  nixt  they  paying  the  haill 
bygane  aual  rents  and  no  other  waves. 


continwit. 


The  same  day  it  is  to  be  rememberit  that  the  collector  receavit  of  ye  Money 
Gorball  money  fyve  hundrethe  merkis  for  ye  qlk  he  is  to  be  chargit  at  the 
making  of  his  compt. 

The  sd  day  it  is  recoinendit  to  the  bailyie  Walter  Neilson  and    to  the  Armes. 
collecto"'  to  see  the  money  brocht  in  that  is  awine  for  airmes. 

The  sd  day  appoynts  the  deikins  of  tailyo''s  cordoners    skinners    and  Scooll. 
flescho''s  and  visito''  of  maltmen  to  visie  the  scooll  what  poore  boyes  is  yin 
and  to  report. 

15  Junij  1653. 

The  sd  day  Johne  Woddrope  sone  to  Johne  Woddrope  in  Carntyne  is  Woddrope 
buikit  prenteis  w*  James  Robisoun  baxter  dureing  the  space  of  seivine  yeiris  ^ 
as  prenteis  and  twa  ye^s  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indento''  of  ye  dait 
of  thir  pntis. 

29  June  1653. 

The  sd  day  Thomas  Wilkie  lau"  sone  to  Johne  Wilkie  in  Udingstoune  Wiikie 
is  buikit  heirin  as  prenteis  and  servand  w'  Walter  M<^Callae  cordoner  dureing  ^"^"^^  ^'^' 
the  space  of  seivine  yeires  conform  to  the  indento''  dated  ye  nynteine  of  No'' 
1652  zeires  last  was. 

Vltimo  Junij  1653. 

The  sd  day  Androw  AUansoune  sone  to  Robert  AUansoun  of  Bramscraft  Aiianesoune 
is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  and  servand  w*  James  Thomsoune  cordoner  conforme  ^^^^  "^* 
to  the  indentor  of  ye  dait  the  14  day  of  Aprylle  1652. 

Octavo  August]  1653. 

The  said  day  conveanit  George  Broome  product  fourtein  punds  i6s.  8d.  Burgess  silver, 
qlk  he  had  receavit  fra  ye  burgess  fra  Merche  1652  to  Michelmes  last  qlk  was 
delyverit  to  the  dekine  conveiner  to  be  givine  to  ye  collecto""  and  he  is  to  be 
chargit  yrsvith. 

The  said  day  compt  and  reckning  being  maid  amongst  the  deikine  con-  Money 
veaner  and  certaine  of  ye  deikins  and  vyrs  of  ye  deikin  conveinars  counsell 
anent  what  was  restand  awand  be  them  of  thair  severall  proportiouns  qlk  was 
to  be  payit  for  ye  lands  of  Gorballs  and  efter  cpt  and  reckning  maid  it  was 


3o8 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1653 


Compt 
Duncaae. 


fund  thair  is  awine  be  ye  several!  tredds  eftspeit  qlks  audit  to  pay  aualrent 
f ra  Witsonday  last  q"  the  samy  be  payit  viz : 


The  maltmen 
The  hefiiermen 
The  weivaris 
The  coupars 
The  cordoneiis 
The  talyo''s 
The  wTights 


60    o 

88    9 

212    0 

90  13 


16    0 


27  October  1653. 
The  sd  day  the  deikine  conveiner  deikins  of  craftis  and  thair  brethreine 
being  conveanit  James  Duncane  late  collector  maid  compt  of  his  intromissioun 
wt  ye  hospitalls  guids  fra  Hallowmes  1652  to  Hallowmes  1653  qrof  charg  and 
discharge  fallowes  and  first  the 


Charge. 
In  ye  first  y"^  was  restand  be  ye  comptar  at  ye  making  of  his  last 

cpt  .... 

Receavit  fra  ye  deikins  of  qrter  compts    . 
Ite  fra  the  gardners 
Item  fra  ye  litsters 
Ite  receavit  fra  W°'  Reid  of  small  dewties  conform  to  the  act 

ye  7'  of  Febi^  last 
Ite  receavit  fra  George  Broom  of  burgess  sUver 
Ite  receavit  for  ye  vse  of  ye  scoolle  master 
Ite  fra  Georg  Lyone  for  twa  %-eiris  arent  of  300  I1  for  Candlemes 

1652  and  preceiding  ..... 

Ite  receavit  fra  John  Tennent  as  a  p*  of  233  ll  6s.  8d.  w'  half 

zeirs  arent  yof  y*  he  was  awn  at  Candilmes  1653 
Receavit  Witsonday  last  fra  Robert  Hunter  of  Whytsj-d  to  ane 

compt  ....... 

Receavit  fra  Ro*  Cumyng  that  he  was  awin  be  band 

Ite  fra  the  coupers  as  a  pairt  of  y''  proportionall  p'  of  ye  Gorballs 

Ite  fra  Johne  Young  mch<^  for  himself  and  his  pairtners  as  being 

a  pairt  of  ye  teynds  of  Gorballs  set  to  y™  and  vy""s  in  ano  1652 

qlk  is  to  be  allowit  be  ye  hospitall  as  a  pairt  of  ye  rents  of 

Gorballs         ....... 

Ite  receavit  fra  ye  deikine  conveaner  qlk  he  got  fra  Johne  Stewart 

elder  ....... 


309    3  10 

199  o  o 
3  6  8 
6  13  4 

63    o  o 

14  16  8 

52  19  2 

36    0  0 

100    o  o 

181  16  o 

66  13  4 

200  o  o 


3S1  13    4 
II     0    o 


Suilia  of  ye  wholl  charge  is 

ane  thowsand  sax  hundreth  threttie  ane  punds  13s.  4d. 


m 

0 

0 

66 

13 

4 

12 

0 

0 

20 

0 

o 

33 

6 

8 

24 

0 

0 

1653]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  309 

Discharge. 

Imprimis  debursit  to  the  sax  poore  men  in  yc  hous  to  ilk  ane  of 
y'"  48  li  in  ye  ycir      inde     ..... 

Ite  debursit  to  the  college  collecto"^  for  ye  bursar 

Ite  for  schoone  to  ye  poore  men  .... 

Ite  to  the  clerk  ...... 

Ite  to  the  scoolemaister  ..... 

Ite  for  his  hous  maill      ...... 

Ite  debursit  to  Henri  Mschell  James  Ogilvie  Thomas  Andersone 
Johne  Fultone  and  Margret  Davie  for  thair  monethlie 
meintinance  conforme  to  ye  ordo""     ....     165  12    o 

Item  to  Mathow  Colquhon  and  vy's  for  dressing  ye  hospitall  and 

bell .       31     5    8 

Ite  to  ye  relict  of  vmq"  Gabrell  Conyngham  for  ye  Mtmcs  {me 

1652  .  .  .  .  .  .  .450 

Ite  to  vmq"  Ro*  Grayes  sone  to  helpe  him  to  a  craft       .  .       13    6    8 

Item  for  threttin  ells  half  ell  and  halfe  qrter  of  woline  cloathe  to 
be  cleuks  and  hoise  to  ye  poore  men  and  ane  stand  of  claithes 
to  James  Weinyett  and  fourtie  twa  ells  of  sarking  cloathe  all 
for  ye  vse  of  ye  poor  men      .  .  .  .  .       82  17     4 

Ite  for  making  sax  cleuks  and  stand  of  claithes  and  sa.\  pair  of 

hois  .  .  .  .  .  .  .564 

Ite  for  coalls  and  peits    .  .  .  .  .  .       14     7     o 

Ite  yr  was  payit  at  Witsonday  1653  to  Sir  Ro'  Douglas  ane 
thowsand  punds  qrof  Johne  Ker  in  name  of  the  tailyo's  payit 
twa  hundrethe  rhkis  and  the  deikin  conveiner  payit  for 
Robert  Boyd  fyve  hundreth  niks  and  ye  comptar  debursit 
to  mak  ye  said  1000  li  .  .  .  .  .     533    6    8 

Ite  debursit  to  dyvers  poor  people  at  ye  sevcrall  courts  conforme 

to  the  warrands        .  .  .  .  .  .       93     o     8 

Sufha  of  the  whoU  dischairge  is 

ane  thowsand  thrie  hundrethe  four  scoir  nyne  punds  7s. 
Swa  charge  and  discharge  being  compared  rests  be  ye 
comptar  twa  hundreth  threttie  twa  punds  6s.  8d. 

The  sd  day  the  foirsd  James  Duncane  is  continowit  collector  for  ye  yeir  Duncare 
to  come  quha  being  pnt  acceptit  and  gave  his  aith.  coUecto'. 

The  sd  day  thair  was  producet  on  ye  table  ane  hundreth  and  fyftie  punds  Money 
being  W'mphra  Colquhons  gildbroy  fyne  qlk  is  delyverit  to  ye  collector  in  '^°"<=^'°'- 
keipinge  till  Mtimes  nixt. 


310  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1653 

Ordaines  George  Broome  to  put  Jordaneliills  band  to  execu-n  w'  all 
dilligence. 

Bandcollecto'.  The  said  day  the  bands  fallowing  ar  delyvit  to  ye  collector  and  he  is  to 

be  chargit  ywith  viz  Silvertounhills  Robert  Hunters  John  Zounge  and  James 
Watsones  and  Bothuallhauches  band  is  takine  out. 

Fallowis  the  rentalls  of  the  haill  few  dewties  and  anvell  rentis  qlk  is  due  to 
be  payit  to  the  craftis  hospitall  within  Glasgow  as  the  samjTie  are 
now  in  vse  of  pay'  bot  wes  nevir  bookit  of  befor. 

Stabillgreine. 
In  the  first  Jo"  Thomesounes  land  y""         .  .  .  vij  s.  vj  d. 

Item  vmq"  Jo"  Watirstounes  land  now  occupyit  be  Barbara  Stevinstone 

vij  s.  vj  d. 
Item  \\'ilham  Dobbies  land  thair  .  •  .  .     \-j  li  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Drygaiie. 
Item  Johne  Clerks  land  thair  .  .  .  .  .  iij  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  Johne  Wardanes  land  thair  ....  xvj  s. 

Ite  Jo°  Hall  his  land  thair  now  occupyed  be  Jonet  Watsone  his  mother 

xvj  s. 
Item  David  Wardanes  land  thair  .....  iiij  t  iij  s. 
Item  Johne  Fleymings  land  thair    .  .  .  .  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  vmq"  Ro'  Maxwells  lands  thair  now  perteaneing  to  ye  aires  of  vmq^' 

Johne  Stirling  in  Badorren      .  .  .  .  .  vj  s.  viij  d. 

Item  W™  Mitchell  and  Robert  Hall  equaly  betuixt  them  for  y^  lands  y"'  qlk 

wes  mortified  be  \-mqi'  Gabriell  Conynghame  .  viij  ll  x  s. 

Item  Maister  Jo°  Spreules  land  at  the  held  of  the  Drj'gate  .  iiij  ll 

Ratio  itnra-X'. 

Item  Ro'  Marshell  nottar  for  his  landis  in  Deansyd            .  .  lix  s. 

Item  M^  Jo°  Herbertsone  for  his  Deansyd  zaird    .             .  xxxj  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  Quanteine  Rankeine  for  the  lands  in  the  Rattounraw  .  xx  s. 

Beneath  the  Wyndheid  to  the  Cross. 

Item  James  Jlitchells  land  now  Johne  Brj'ssounes  .  xxj  s.  iiij  d. 

Item  vmq"  James  Stewart  that  dwelt  in  the  derrie  his  land  .           viij  s. 

Item  James  Watirstounes  land  y''               .             .  .  .            xij  s. 

Item  Waltir  Bryce  for  vmq"  Jo°  Blair  his  land     .  .  .           xvj  s. 

Item  M"'  Hew  Blair  for  his  lands  in  the  Frovandsyd  .  vj  1  xiij  s.  4d. 

Ite  vmq"  Ar"!  Hiegats  land  now  Robert  Sanderis  .  .              ix  s 

Item  vmq"  Ca.  Smyths  land  now  Ja^^  Whythills  .  .               vs. 

Ite  Artho^  Luggies  land  yr             .             .             .  .  .              vs. 


1053] 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


3" 


Ite  Ja.  Scheills  land  y''      .             .             .             .  .  .  vs. 

Ite  Jo"  Drews  land  y''       .             .             .             .  .  .  vs. 

Item  Thomas  Norvells  land  y''       .             •             .  .  .  x  s. 

Ite  vmq"  Alex"'  Langs  land  in  the  vennell              .  .  ,  xx  s. 
Item  vmq"  Jo"  Stewart  elder  mortified  to  be  vpliftit  yeirlie  out  of  ane  laich 

foir  house  now  belonging  to  W">  Lichtbodie    .  .  .  liij  s.     4d. 

Item  Waltir  AF.^laster  for  vmq'i  M''  Hew  Gibsones  land  .  .  x  s. 

Ite  W"  Drews  land            .             .             .             .  .  .  x  s. 

Item  vmq"  Ar^*  Hall  his  land         .             .             .  .  .  xv  s. 

Beyond  the  Gallowgaite  Burne. 

Item  be  Johne  Andirsone  for  ane  of  his  aikers  of  land  in  Dovvhill    iiij  s.  vj  d. 

Item  be  Johne  Nisbitt  sone  to  vmq"  Johne  Nisbitt  tailzo'  for  his  lands  y"'  on 

ye  north  syd  of  ye  gait  .....  xiij  s. 

Ite  be  James  \\'adrope  for  his  landis  on  the  south  syd      .  .  iiij  s.  vj  d. 

Saltmarcatc. 
Item  vmq"  James  Wallace  land    .  .  .  .  .  vj  s. 

Ite  vmq"  James  Stewarts  land  that  was  bought  fre  ye  sd  vmq"  James  Wallace 

vj  s. 
Item  vmq"  (  )  Hawstounes  land  payit  of  auld  viij  marks  and 

the  samyne  now  being  dividct  among  severall  persones  the  sd  arent  is 

payit  as  fallowis  to  witt 
Wmq"  Walter  Millers  land  .....  Ivij  s. 

Ite  Jo"  Hamiltone  callit  of  Braes  his  p'  y^'of  .  .  .  viij  s. 

Ite  Waltir  Lochheid  his  p*  y''of      .  .  .  .  .  vj  s. 

Ite  James  Lochheid  cowper  his  p'  thairof  .  .  .  iiij  s. 

Ite  Wm  Bogles  p'  y^oi        .  .  .  .  .  .  x  s. 

Ite  JManasses  Lyll  his  p'  thairof     ....  xxj  s.  viij  d. 

Qlk  compleits  the  said  aught  merkis. 

Ite  W™  Howies  land  .....  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  Jo"  Wilsone  merch'  for  his  lands  qlk  of  old  belonging  to  vmq"  INf  Johne 

Clarke  ......  .        xxiij  s. 


Briggaite. 
Ite  W™  Conynghames  land  thair  .  .  .  .  .  xv  s. 

Ite  George  Lyounes  land  thair       .....      xxviiij  s. 
Ite  Androw  Haddowies  land  .....         xxix  s. 

Ite  M""  Ar*!  Lornes  land  y"^  ....  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  Thomas  Huchesones  land         ....  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ite  Jo"  Barnes  younger  for  his  land  .  .  .  .  xx  s. 

Ite  vmq"  Thomas  Mures  land  now  belonging  to  M'"  Hew  Blair      .  x  s. 

Ite  vmq"  Jo"  Bairdes  land  on  the  south  syd  now  belonging  to  M''  Ar^  Lome  xs. 
Ite  Coleine  Campbells  land  y''        .  .  .  .  .  xj  s. 


312 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW 


[1653 


Stockwellgate. 


Ite  Mathow  Allanes  land  y"' 
Item  W""  Shawis  land  y'  . 


Trongaite. 
Ite  the  toune  for  the  fleshmercate 
Ite  David  Birscats  land  in  the  south  syd  . 
Item  Ro*  Mershell  notar  for  his  lands  y^   . 


U]  s. 
iij  s. 


viij  s. 

xiij  s. 

vs. 


The  day  afoirsaid  thir  bandis  fallowing  to  wit  Silvertounhills  Robert 
Hunters  Johne  Youngs  and  James  Watsounes  with  Bothuallliauches  cur  all 
delyverit  to  the  collecto''. 

Memento  Johne  Tennent  is  awine  at  Candilmes  1653  twa  hundrethe  merks  with 

annwaiusf       the  arent  sensyne  Robert  Hunter  is  awin  at  Whytsonday  1653  ane  hundreth 
thriescoir  sax  punds  4s. 


Prenteis 
Clark. 


16  Nove^  1653. 

The  said  day  Alex'"  Clerk  sone  naturall  to  vmq"  Johne  Clerk  mchand  is 
buikit  prenteis  with  \^■  alter  Locheheid  baxter  for  seivine  zeirs  fra  Candilmes 
last  conform  to  the  indento''  of  ye  dait  of  thir  presentis. 


Memento 
moneyis  and 
annwallis. 

Money 
coUecto'. 


Money 
coUecto'. 


29  Nov^  1653. 

The  said  day  the  dekins  and  counsell  present  gave  thair  oathes  of  fidelitie 
as  vse  is  zeirUe. 

Phillen  Snype  and  Johne  Young  ar  awine  the  haill  arentis  since  ye  dait 
of  yr  band. 

The  said  day  William  Reid  producet  tlie  moneys  contenit  in  ye  old  rentall 
being  fiftie  aucht  pundis  j  s.  and  becaus  he  wont  to  get  twa  dolloi's  zeirhe  for 
collecting  thairof  the  dekine  conveiner  and  his  counsell  in  consideratioune 
yrof  and  to  helpe  to  buy  his  cloathes  ordanis  the  collecto''  to  pay  him  twelfe 
punds. 

The  same  day  in  respect  it  hes  pleased  God  to  mak  ye  victuall  cheiper 
appoj-ntis  ye  collecto''  to  detein  twelf  schilhngs  fra  ye  pensioners  ilk  monethe. 

The  said  day  the  collector  receavit  aucht  punds  fra  ilk  ane  of  j-es  persones 
fallowing  qlk  the\'  sould  ha\'e  paied  as  new  deikins  for  ye  helpe  of  ye  poore 
to  wit  Robert  Bankis  fleschof  Johne  Miller  maltman  James  ^^'oddrope  cordoner 
Gabriell  Corbet  cordoner  Robert  Reid  wreicht  Artho''  Taccats  W™  Filpe 
saidlers  \MUiam  Fergussoune  talyour  Johne  Glen  baxter  and  Phillen  Snype 
couper. 


i654]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  313 

The  said  day  it  is  appoyntit  to  be  rememberit  that  the  collector  lies  receavit  Jroucy 
of  moneys  fra  Jordanehill  that  was  awne  be  M"'  Niniane  Campbell  as  prin"  *^°  "'^  ° ' 
baith  the  prin"  arent  and  expenss  of  ye  Ires  extending  to  thrie  hundrethe 
thriescoir  seivine  punds  los.  4d.  and  fra  Ro'  Cumyng  of  burgess  silver  pre- 
ceiding  Michelmes  last  twentie  four  punds  and  is  to  receave  frae  George  Broome 
for  daills  qlk  he  bocht  belonging  to  the  hospitall  twentie  fyve  punds  los.  with 
the  qlks  haill  sowmes  befoir  wrytin  the  collecto''  is  to  be  chargit  at  ye  making 
of  his  nixt  compt. 

13  Februar  1654. 

The  same  day  it  was  declaircd  be  the  collecto''  tliat  he  had  receaved  of  Money 
the  Gorball  rents  for  ye  croppe  1652  latlie  four  hundreth  punds  and  everie 
craft  quha  did  advance  money  for  buying  y  pairt  of  ye  sds  lands  being  paied 
of  y''  owne  proportione  yof  thair  rested  in  his  hands  of  ye  hous  pairt  and  vthers 
that  is  awin  to  ye  hous  the  sowme  of  (  )  and  that  by  and  atto"" 

ye  sowme  of  (  )    awine   be  ye   hemermen   and   the   sowme   of 

(  )  awn  be  ye  coupers. 

20  Merch  1654. 
The  said  day  Allexander  Thomesoune  lauful  sone  to  Alex"^  Thomesoune  Thomsone 
ffichand  burges  of    this  burgh  is  buikit  prenteis  with  Robert  Thomesoune  p'^^"''^"'" 
tailj'o''  for  seivine  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the 
indento''  dated  ye  xj  of  Feb''  last. 

12  Maij  1654. 
The  said  day  in  anser  to  the  suppHcatioune  givine  in  befoir  them  be  Johne  Presmutiovn 
Or  talyo"^  burges  of  ye  sd  bru'  they  doe  heirby  give  and  grant  to  (  )     '^' 

Or  laufuU  sone  to  ye  said  Johne  Or  that  place  of  bursarie  within  the  Colledge 
of  Glasgow  at  y'  gift  and  presenta-une  conforme  to  ye  mortifica~un  maid 
yanent  be  vmq"  M""  Johne  Howiesoun  sometj'me  minister  at  Cambuslang  and 
qlk  was  last  occupyed  be  (  )  Fawsyd  lau'i  sone  to  vmq"  Wilham 

Fawsyd  baxter  burges  of  ye  sd  bru'  and  that  dureing  the  space  of  four  yeirs 
and  wills  and  desyres  ye  prin"  and  regents  of  the  said  colledge  to  admitt  and 
receave  ye  sd  (  )  Or  he  being  fund  qualifeit  in  witncs  qrof  thir 

pnts  ar  sub*  be  W™  Zair  y  clerk  at  y  cmand. 

The  same  day  ordaines  ye  colector  to  lend  to  Robert  Adame  talyour  Adame. 
wpone  his  band  fiftie  merks  money  to  helpe  him  to  ane  stock  againc. 

18  Aiigtist  1654. 
The  said  day  it  being  informed  that  sundrie  abuises  had  beine  lieirtoloir  Baiiyie  of  ye 
comitted  and  muche  of  ye  coinoune  guids  of  ye  severall  craftis  spent  ydlie  dSkin''"'* 
and  not  bestowed  for  the  helpe  and  ayd  of  ye  poore  decayed  brethreine  as  it  conveiner  to 
aught  to  be  for  eshewing  of    these  and  the  lyk  abuises  it  is  heirby  inactit  deikins 
statute  and  ordanit  be  ye  deikine  conveiner  deikins  of  craftis  and  haill  brethrein  '^°'"P'^- 


314 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1654 


Collecto' 
money. 


Everie  new 
dekine  to  pay 
\iij  lib. 


Cordoneris. 


who  for  ye  maist  pairt  wer  pnt  that  quhen  any  deikine  of  craft  or  y"^  coUecto'^s 
shall  happin  to  mak  y"'  comptis  heirefter  the  balyie  for  ye  crafts  with  the  deikine 
conveiner  for  ye  tyme  shall  be  warnit  for  the  heiring  of  ye  sd  compts  and  the 
deikine  conveiner  shall  tak  twa  other  deikins  with  him  for  yat  effect  and  that 
for  the  taking  speciall  trj-ell  that  nothing  be  idhe  spent  of  any  crafts  guids 
bot  that  all  shall  be  maid  to  come  in  for  ye  weell  of  ilk  craft  and  poore  decayed 
brethrein  yi'of. 

The  same  day  it  is  ordanit  to  be  remeberit  that  ye  tailyo^'s  is  awine  of 
yer  sax  thowsand  merks  promittit  for  yr  p'  of  ye  lands  of  Gorballs  in  ye  hous 
four  hundrethe  mks  with  the  arent  yrof  since  Whytsonday  1653  and  yat  y"^ 
was  receavit  be  the  collecto""  of  ye  Gorball  rent  at  \Mtsonday  last  twa  hundreth 
pundis  wherof  thair  fell  to  ilk  thowsand  merks  that  was  payed  for  ye  Gorballs 
sax  punds  4s.  2d.  and  swa  the  collecto''  haveing  to  receave  for  ye  hous  aught 
thowsand  ihkis  he  is  to  be  charged  at  ye  making  of  his  cpt  \\ith  fourtie  nyne 
punds  13s.  4d.  as  being  j'e  hous  pairt  yrof. 

The  said  day  it  is  statute  and  ordanit  that  whaewer  heirefter  sail  be 
electit  and  chosine  ane  new  dekine  of  his  calling  befoir  he  get  ane  woyte  as 
ane  of  j'e  deikine  con\'einers  counsell  he  shall  pay  to  ye  collector  for  ye  vse 
of  the  poore  audit  punds  money  in  satisfactioun  of  y'  qlk  they  wont  to  pay  of 
befoir  for  aimics. 

23  November  1654. 
The  sd  day  the  dekine  conveiner  the  haill  dcikines  new  and  old  being 
con\-eined  for  the  setleing  of  thair  counsell  and  otlier  things  befoir  they  metled 
w'  any  mater  thej'  thoght  guid  to  setle  first  the  contraversie  now  standing 
amongst  the  cordoners  and  haveing  hard  at  lenthe  ane  complaint  maid  be 
James  \\'oddrop  and  Gabrell  Corbet  lait  deikins  of  cordoners  for  themsellis 
and  in  name  of  ye  rest  of  ye  brethrein  of  ye  sd  craft  adheareing  to  y™  anent 
ane  illegall  cours  and  proceiding  vsit  be  y'^  pnt  deikine  and  others  of  ye  calHng 
in  the  choyseing  and  electing  of  the  masters  of  y""  craft  at  Jlichellmes  last  and 
Ar*'  Andersoune  present  deikine  of  ye  sd  craft  as  also  the  plentives  being  all 
removit  efter  good  considera'ne  had  yanent  be  ye  sd  dekine  conveiner  and 
deikins  of  crafts  foirsd  they  finding  that  the  election  of  ye  masters  of  ye  sd 
craft  at  tliis  last  Michellmes  lies  not  ben  so  formall  and  fair  and  according  to 
ye  ancient  and  laudable  custom  observit  in  ye  sd  craft  in  the  lyk  and  yat 
ye  sd  plentives  had  producet  ane  lyte  qlk  they  alledgc  was  aggreid  vpon  and 
could  not  be  gottin  weell  voycen  be  ye  sd  Ar"*  present  deikine  out  of  ye  qlkis 
the  craftis  sex  masters  wex  to  be  electit  cyform  to  the  ordo""  qlk  lyte  the  sd 
deikin  convener  and  deikincs  teuk  as  ane  verie  fare  and  honest  Ij'te  and  they 
being  most  tender  of  ye  deikins  libertie  and  priviledge  anent  the  cho\-seing 
of  his  sax  maisters  of  ye  sds  twelfe  maisters  of  ye  said  craft  the  said  deikine 
convener  and  deikincs  ordaincs  lieirby  the  sd  Archibald  Andersone  present 


i654]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGO^^■.  315 

dcikine  of  ye  sd  craft  to  mak  ane  new  woitt  of  his  said  sex  maisters  of  craft 
and  for  ye  weell  of  the  craft  and  his  awne  honestie  and  creddit  to  mak  choyse 
of  sex  of  ye  most  honest  and  famous  men  of  ye  calling  he  can  pitche  vpon  and 
also  for  the  other  sex  quhich  ar  to  be  electit  be  ye  craft  that  they  be  chosin 
conform  to  ye  cmoun  ordour  out  of  the  foirsd  lite  product  be  ye  sds  plentives 
and  this  to  be  done  w*  ye  best  dilligence  and  convenience  and  delayes  the 
acceptatioun  of  y'"  number  in  the  hous  to  have  voyce  as  a  p'  of  ye  deikin 
cyveiners  coimsell  conform  to  old  vse  and  wont  whill  this  decreit  be  fulllilled 
and  obeyed  in  all  poynts  ell  ye  form  and  tn''  yrof. 

The  sd  day  be  pluralitie  of  votts  Johne  Muir  maltman  is  electit  collecto""  Coilecto'. 
of  ye  calling  for  ye  zeir  to  come. 

The  same  day  George  Broome  producet  George  Lyouns  band  whilk  was 
put  in  ye  box. 

Fallowes  these  wha  ar  on  the  deikine  conveiners  counsell. 

AUex'  Japhrae    _  Johne  Miller  visitor 

Johne  Ker  \\'illiame  Reid 

Arti  Andersounc  George  Broome 

Johne  Glen  George  Clerk 

Patrik  Clerk  Robert  Marschell 

Johne  Rankein  W™  Craig 
Johne  Hall 

Walter  Neilson  balyie 

James  Duncane  W"^  Neilsone 

Artho""  Taccats  Walter  Bryce 

James  Barclay  Johne  Muir 

Johne  Walker  Androw  Mudie 

Johne  Burnes  Ninan  Andersoune 

Johne  Miller  Robert  Muir 

Robert  Boyd  Gabrell  Cumyng 

James  Stirling 

Robert  Carruthers  a 

William  Johnstoune  Androw  Love 

Johne  Caldwell  a 
James  Woddrope 

Gabriell  Corbet  a  Robert  Banks 

Hew  Andersoune  Alex"^  Holmes 

Johne  Wood 
Walter  M^Calla 


3i6  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1654 

Johne  Young 
Phillen  Sn^^pe 

Johne  Buchannan  elder  and  yo''     Andrew  Jape 

Ar"  Glen 

Patrick  Bryce  Mathow  Browne  a 

Johne  Falcouner 


W™  Boyd 
Daniel  Broune  a 


James  Dugall 


The  sd  day  James  Duncane  lait  collector  maid  cpt  of  his  haill  intromissioune 
w'  ye  guids  belonging  to  the  house  and  distributioune  thairof  since  the  tyme 
he  was  last  electit  qrof  charge  and  discharge  is  as  fallowes  and  first  ye 

Charge. 

Compt  In  the  first  the  comptar  is  restand  awand  in  at  ye  making  of 

Duncane  j^-^  j^^^  compt  ......      0232     06     8 

Ite  receaved  frae  the  deikins  of  quarter  compts  and  from  the 

litsters  and  gardners         .....     0209    00    o 

Ite  receaved  from  Wmphra  Colquhoune  for  his  gildrie  fyne    0150    00    o 

Ite  receaved  from  Wilham  Raid  of  ye  aualls  awine  to  the  house 

conforme  to  the  act  daittit  the  29  of  No""  1653      .  .     0058    00    o 

Ite  receaved  be  the  comptar  fra  ten  old  deikins  ilk  ane  of  them 
aught  punds  conforme  to  the  act  of  j-e  same  dait  e.xtending 
to  .......     0080     10    o 

Item  receaved  be  him  be  warrand  of  ye  same  dait  fra  the  good- 
man  of  Jordanehill  as  being  ye  prin"  sowme  aual  rent  and 
expenss  that  was  awand  be  jNf  Ninan  Campbell     .  .     0367     10     4 

Ite  be  ye  same  act  receaved  fra  Robert  Cumyng  of  burgess 

silver  .......     0024     00     o 

Ite  be  ye  same  act  fra  George  Broome  for  daills  .  .     0025     00    o 

Item  of  ye  f>'\-e  hundi'ethe  punds  receaved  be  the  comptar  for 
the  hous  and  crafts  pairt  of  the  lands  of  Gorballs  the  croppe 
1652  efter  compt  and  reckning  and  payment  maid  be  the 
comptar  to  the  craftis  vndertakeris  thair  restit  in  ye 
comptars  hands  belonging  to  the  house  the  sowme  of        0238    01     2 

Ite  receaved  frae  the  hemermen  that  was  awin  be  them  in  com- 

pleit  paj'ment  of  y^  pairt  of  the  lands  of  Gorballs    .  .     0043     17     o 

Ite  fra  the  coupers  for  ye  lyk    .  .  .  _  .  .     0069     14     2 

Ite  receaved  from  Johne  Tennent  tailyour  at  Mtimes  1653  of 

prin"  sowme  ......     0133    oG    8 


16543        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOl'SE  OF  GLASGOA\'.  317 

Ite  receavit  fra  ye  weiveris  as  restand  of  thair  pairt  of  ye  lands 

of  Gorballs  ......     0200     00     o 

Ite  fra  Robert  Thomesoune  talyour  for  his  gildrie  fyne  .     0116     13    4 

Ite  frae  Walter  Robiesoune  for  his  gildrie  fyne  .  .     0133     06     8 

Ite  receaved  frae  the  exeoris  of  vmq"  Johne  Wilsoune  of  legacie     0013     06     8 
Ite  from  Robert  Boyd  talyo^  that  was  restand  of  his  band    0062     17     o 
Ite  of  ye  200  ti  as  ane  pairt  of  ye  Gorball  rent  payit  conforme 
to  the  act  daittit  the  8  of  August  1654  the  rest  of  the  crafts 
v-ndertakers  being  payit  of  thair  p's  thairof  thair  rests  yrof 
to  ye  hous  ......     0057    02     o 

Item  receaved  of  the  money  y'  was  awin  be  Robert  Hoggiszard 

and  James  Watsoune  be  thair  twa  bands  .  .  .     0032    00    o 

Ite  fra  Johne  Millar  for  four  zeirs  and  ane  halfes  arent  of  ye 

400  inks  awin  be  him       .....     0072     00    0 

Ite  fra  Phillen  Snype  for  ye  auall  of  fyve  hundrethe  merks  to 

ane  compt  ......     0020    00    o 

Sufiia  of  the  haill  charge  is 

twa  thowsand  thrie  hundrethe  threttie  aught  punds  j  s.  viij  d. 


Discharge. 

In  ye  first  deburst  to  ye  sax  poore  men  in  ye  house  as  being 

y"^  ordinar  allowance  in  ye  qrter  .  .  .     0288     00     o 

Ite  be  warrand  to  W"  Reid  officer     ....     0013     06     8 
Ite  debursit  first  for  ingetting  of  Robert  Hoggiszards  and  James 

Watsones   moneys  .....     0001     04    o 

Ite  debursit  for  registrating  of  M''  Ninian  Campbells  band       .     0004     18     o 
Ite  to  vmq"  Gabriell  Conynghames  relict        .  .  .     0008     10     o 

Item  debursit  to  the  Laird  of  Luse  to  helpe  to  mak  vpe  a  pairt 

of  ye  crafts  money  of  ye  pryce  of  the  Gorballs  zet  vnpayed     0866     13     4 
M''  for  shoone  to  ye  sex  poore  men  in  the  hous  .  .     0012     00     o 

Ite  to  WiUiam  Reid  for  chargeing  of  Jordanhill  .  .     ooor     04     o 

Ite  debursit  to  the  towne  the  samen  as  a  pairt  of  ye  moneys  awin 

for  the  Gorballs  .....     0333     06     8 

Ite  for  42  ells  of  hardine  to  be  sarks  to  ye  poor  men     .  .     0018     18     o 

Ite  for  twentie  ells  of  gray  cloathe  and  ane  half  to  be  cloathes 

and  hoes  to  them  at  40s.  ye  ell  is  .  .  .     0041     00    o 

Ite  for  twentie  fyve  ells  bleitcht  hardin  to  lyne  thair  cloathes  at 

8s.  ye  ell 
Ite  for  a  spaid  held       ...... 

Ite  to  the  coUedge  coUecto''  for  twa  yeirs  dewtie  for  ye  bursour 
Ite  for  making  the  fyve  stand  of  cloathes  and  James  Weinzets 

hoes  .......     0004     12     o 


0010 

00 

0 

0000 

12 

0 

0133 

06 

8 

3i8 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1654 


0000    16    0 


Muir 
collecto'. 


PoUok. 


0033      06      8 


0000 

07 

0 

0000 

18 

8 

0020 

00 

0 

0007 

06 

0 

0019 

12 

10 

0000 

13 

4 

0240     00     o 


Ite  for  sending  ane  boy  four  tjTnes  to  Jordenhill 

Ite  lent  to  Robert  Adame  to  help  him  to  ane  stok  vpon  his 
band  ....... 

Ite  for  a  pairt  of  ye  chairges  in  getting  in  some  of  Robert  Hoggis- 
zards  and  James  Watsouns  moneys 

Ite  for  e.xtracting  ye  rentall  of  \'e  Gorballs 

Ite  to  ye  clerk  for  his  fieall      ..... 

Ite  for  Williame  Maynes  kist  and  winding  sheit 

M''  for  coalls  and  peits  ..... 

Ite  for  ane  harle  ...... 

Ite  to  the  pensioners  monethlie  to  wit  James  Ogilvie  the  relict 
of  ye  deceist  Hendrie  Mchell  Johne  Fultoun  elder  skynner 
Thomas  Andersone  and  Margret  Davisone  twelf  punds 
scots  qrof  James  Ogilvie  gets  monethhe  thrie  pund  Thomas 
Andersone  thrie  pund  the  relict  of  Hendrie  Mschell  thrie 
pund  John  Fultoun  four  schilling  sterling  and  Margret 
Davisone   ane      inde  ..... 

Ite  to  severall  poore  at  Hallow  court  conforme  to  the  particular 
compt         ....... 

Ite  to  ye  severall  poore  at  Candilmes  court  1654 

Ite  to  ye  poore  at  Beltane  court  .... 

Ite  to  ye  poore  at  Lambes  court  1654 

Suma  of  the  haill  discharge  is 

twa  thowsand  ane  hundreth  thriescoir  ten  pundis  14s.  6d. 
and  so  chairge  and  dischairge  being  compared  thair  rests  in 
the  cpters  hands  ane  hundrethe  thriescoir  seivine  punds  7s.  2d. 

The  sd  day  George  Broome  producet  of  burgess  silver  gottin  this  day 
and  preceiding  fourtie  seivin  punds  5s. 

The  same  day  be  pluralitie  of  votts  Johne  Muir  maltman  is  electit  collecto'' 
of  ye  hospitall  for  ye  zeir  to  come  and  the  deikins  of  talyo''s  cordoners  and 
skynners  being  newlie  electit  hes  payit  thair  aught  punds  to  the  sd  Johne 
Muir  and  he  is  to  be  charget  ywith. 

The  said  day  in  answer  to  the  supplicatioune  givine  in  be  Charles  Pollock 
craveing  some  helpe  for  advancement  of  his  work  at  ye  heugli  ordaines  the 
sd  Johne  ^luir  collecto''  to  pay  him  fourtie  iTiks. 

4  Dec"  1654. 
Scoit  prenieis  The  sd  day  Johne  Scott  sone  to  Johne  Scott  in  Northe  Woodsyde  is  buikit 

prenteis  with  Johne  Scott  baxster  burges  of  this  bru*  dureing  ye  space  of 
seivine  yeirs  as  prenteis  and  servand  conforme  to  the  indento''  dated  the  saxt 
day  of  November  last  was. 


0038 

00 

0 

0027 

16 

8 

0016 

08 

0 

0027 

18 

0 

i655l       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  319 

Duodecimo  Fehrnarij  1655. 

The  sd  day  the  deacon  conveiner  with  the  deacons  of  crafts  and  thair 
counsell  being  convenit  quha  for  the  maist  paiit  wer  present  Johne  Muir  pnt 
coUectour  is  appoyntit  to  accept  fra  James  Duncan  late  collectour  Robert 
Cummins  band  for  twentie  four  punds  as  being  a  part  of  the  moneys  that  the 
sd  James  Duncan  was  awand  at  the  making  of  his  last  compt  as  also  thair 
is  rebaited  thairof  to  the  sd  James  fyve  ryalls  and  a  half  qlk  he  got  in  the 
tyme  he  was  collectour  extending  to  (  )  quhilks  ar  now  roupped 

and  sauld  for  ten  punds  and  is  given  to  Michaell  Blair  for  a  supplie  and  farder 
thair  is  rebaited  to  the  sd  James  Duncan  fyve  mks  that  was  awand  be  the 
litsters  and  aucht  punds  that  was  awand  be  William  Phillip. 

The  sd  day  it  is  concludit  that  the  hous  fourt  pairt  of    the  rent  of  the  Bryce 
Gorballs  be  wphfted  for  the  crop  1654  zeirs  be  ane  collectour  to  be  chosen  be 
the  hous  for  that  effect  and  be  plurahtie  of  votes  Patrick  Bryce  weaver  is 
chosen  to  be  collector  of  the  sds  rents  for  the  sd  crop. 

The  same  day  the  hous  taking  to  considera-une  the  want  of  ane  of  thair 
number  of  the  dean  of  gilds  counsell  be  pluralitie  of  votes  James  Duncan  is 
electit  and  chosen  to  supphe  that  place. 

The  same  day  it  is  concludit  that  Thomas  Quantance  be  removed  out  of 
the  hospitall  and  that  (  )  Corbet  bonnetmaker  have  this  quarters 

wages. 

The  sd  day  appoynts  Patrick  Bryce  and  Ninian  Andersoune  to  speak 
the  sessioun  to  get  some  help  to  put  Eleazer  Hammiltouns  sone  to  ane  craft. 

2  Marche. 

The  sd  day  James  Alexander  sone  lawfull  to  James  Alexander  indweller  Prenteis 
within   this  brughe  is  buikit   prentis  with  Johne  Dunkisoune  hammerman 
during  the  space  of  sevin  zeires  and  twa  zeires  for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to 
the  indentour  of  the  daite  of  thir  pntis. 

xxviij  A  pry II. 

The  said  day  Johne  Rankein  sone  lawfull  to  Walter  Rankein  in  Riskend  Prenteis 
of  Eister  Kilsyth  is  buikit  heirin  prenteis  with  William  Merschall  hammerman 
burgess  of  this  bru'  dureing  the  space  of  sewin  yeires  fra  his  entrie  qlk  was 
at  Mertimes  last  and  twa  zeires  for  meit  and  fie  as  they  can  agree  conforme 
to  the  indentours  sett  downe  thairanent  of  the  daite  of  thir  pntis. 


320 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [165 


OD 


Prenteis 
Watsoune. 


Prenteis 
VVilsoune. 


Bischope. 
Craige. 


Ane  catalogue  and  invcntar  oj  the  bands   belonging  to  the  crafts 
Iwspitall  in  Glasgow  and  of  the  soimnes  thairin  contenit. 


In  the  first  a\nne  be  Andrew  Lvll  be  band 


40  ti 


It  awine  be  vmq"  (  )  Hamiltoune  of  Bodelhauche  as  principall 

and  M''  Johne  Dunlope  his  cationer  quhairof  thair  was  awin  at  Mertimas 
16  f3'ftie  four  7  yeires  anual  rent         .  .  .  •      iij*^   fliks 

It  awine  be  George  Lyon  and  his  cationer  quhairof  twa  zeirs  anual  rent  awine 
at  Candlemas  1655      .  .  .  .  .  .  iij*'  li 

It  awin  be  Johne  Miller  taylour  quliairof  the  aiiual  rent  is  awine  since  Whit- 
sunday 1653    .......      iiijc  mks 

It  Robert  Hunter  was  awine  to  the  hous  343  1i  quhairof  he  payed  the  half 
with  the  bygane  aiiual  rents  at  Whitsonday  1653  and  so  he  is  awine  now 
the  wther  half  thairof  with  the  aiiual  rent  thairof  since  the  said  terme 

(  ) 

It  awine  be  Johne  Zoung  and  Phillen  Snyp  quhairof  the  anuall  is  awine  since 

Whitsonday  1653         .  .  .  .  .  .     v^  merks 

It  be  Robert  Cumyng  skinner  quhairof  the  anuall  is  awine  sen  the  daite  of  the 

band  daited  the  last  of  Decbr  1653  ....  xxiiij  ll 
It  awin  be  James  Duncan  as  principall  and  William    Barclay  his  cationer 

quhairof  the  aiiuall  is  awine  sen  Candlemes  1655         .  .      v^  merks 

It  ane  band  granted  be  the  vrnq^i  Laird  of  Silvertounhill  of  40  li  with    ane 

assigna'une  thairto  quhairof  thair  is  awin  at  Martimes  1654  ^5  yeiris 

aiiual  rent. 

Septimo  Junij  1655. 

The  said  day  Williame  Watsoune  son  to  William  \\'atsone  in  Balornook 
is  bookit  prenteis  with  Micheill  Watsoune  weaver  for  sevine  yeiris  conforme 
to  the  indentour  past  y''anent  of  the  daite  the  nynt  day  of  November  1653 
yeiris. 

21  Junij  1655. 

The  said  day  William  Wilsoune  sone  to  Johne  Wilsoune  in  Ransydhill 
is  buikit  prenteis  with  Robert  Wilsoune  hammerman  for  the  space  of  sevine 
yeiris  and  twa  yeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  of  the  daite 
the  24  day  of  Junij  1647  yeiris. 

29  Junij  1655. 
The  sd  day  James  Bischope  maltman  is  be  pluralitie  of  votes  appoyntit 
to  be  placed  ane  of  the  saxe  poore  men  in  the  hospitall  and  the  collectour  is 
to  pay  him  w*  the  rest  accordinglie  and  becaus  James  Craige  is  ane  old  faild 
man  and  hes  ane  hunderethe  iiikis  left  in  legacie  be  his  daughter  and  is  content 
to  give  it  in  to  the  hous  it  is  concludit  yfor  that  the  sd  James  get  ane  bed  in 
the  hous  and  the  collectour  to  receave  the  money  and  to  bestow  thairof  so 
much  wpon  him  as  the  deacon  conveinar  sail  appoynt. 


1 655]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  321 

The  sd  day  appoynts  the  collectour  to  pay  to  Johne  M'^Clay  saxtein  pundis  warrand. 
for  ane  yeir  allenerlie  to  instruct  poore  childrein  whoise  parents  ar  not  able 
to  pay  for  thair  instructioune  and  ordaines  him  to  pay  to  Walter  Neilsoune 
ten  mkis  qlk  he  depursit  for  schooll  maill. 

The  sd  day  Patrick  Bryce  weaver  is  electit  and  choysin  collectour  for  Bryce 
wplifting  of  ye  crafts  fourt  pairt  of  the  rent  of  the  Gorballs  for  the  cropt  1654  *^°  ^'^'™''- 
with  power  to  him  to  grant  discharges  thairwpon  he  allwayis  being  lyable  to 
mak  pay'  to  thame  conforme  to  his  receipts. 

The  sd  day  Ro'  Hoggiszaird  tanner  and  James  Watsoune  taylzour  being  Money 
awand  to  ye  hospitall  ilk  ane  of  y"  twa  hundrethe  mkis  prin"  sowme  qlk  they  '^°  'e<=tour. 
borrowit  fra  the  hospitall  to  mak  wp  the  twentie  thousand  pundis  qlk  the 
towne  lendit  efter  PhiUiphaughe  the  deacon  conveinar  this  day  declaired  that 
he  had  receaved  yof  from  ye  towne  422  mkis  sax  schilling  aucht  pennies  qrof 
he  delyvered  to  James  Duncane  late  collecto"'  32  pundis  for  ye  qlk  he  hes 
alreadie  compted  in  his  last  compt  and  the  rest  yof  extending  to  249  pundis 
13s.  4d.  he  is  to  delyver  to  ye  pnt  collectour  and  he  is  to  be  charged  yw'. 

The  sd  day  George  Broome  wndertook  to  cans  put  the  Ires  of  homing  Broome, 
raisit  against  M"'  Johne  Dunlope  to  executioune  and  yfor  appoynts  the  Ires 
to  be  given  him  wpon  demand. 

The  said  day   for  divers   reasounes    and    consideratiounes    moving    the  Gilmour. 
deacounes  of  crafts  and  thair  counsell  they  heirby  quyt  to  Michael  Gilmour 
fleshor  threttie  pundis  of  his  gildrie  fyne. 

3  Augustf  1655. 
The  said  day  James  Tenent  sone  lau"  to  Johne  Tenent  portionar    of  Prenteis 
Schettilstoun  is  buikit  prenteis  with  Simon  Tenant  tailiour  burges  of  this    ^"^°'- 
brughe  for  the  space  of  fyve  zeiris  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to 
the  indentour  of  the  dait  of  thir  pntis. 

20  Augustf  1655. 

The  said  day  Robert  Cumings  band  of  24  ll  is  givin  to  Johne  Hilar  tailliour  Band  gevin 
to  be  vpliftit  vp  be  him.  '°  "'"^'^• 

The  same  day  it  is  appointit  to  be  rememberit  that  althoe  James  Duncans  Duncane. 
band  of  500  markis  beires  to  have  bein  borrowed  at  Candilmes  last  zit  he  gat 
not  the  money  whill  Whitsonday  and  he  is  to  pay  the  arent  yrfoir  only  fra 
that  terme. 

The  samyn  day  the  band  qlk  the  hous  had  of  Robert    Hoggiszaird    is  Hoggiszaird. 
ordanit  to  be  given  back  to  him  in  regaird  ther  is  payment  gottin  of  the  priiill 
sowme  from  the  towne. 

w 


322  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.         [1655 

Coiiecto'  band  The  samyn  day  it  is  also  to  be  rememberit  that  the  colector  hes  gotine 

George  Lyounes  band  as  also  that  he  hes  resavit  fra  Michell  Gilmour  ane 
hundreth  and  twentie  pundis  for  his  gildrie  fyne  and  he  is  to  be  chargit  yrvvith. 

Lyndsay.  The  Said  day  vpon  ane  complaint  givin  in  be  Johne  Lindsay  litster  against 

Gorge  Findlay  and  Nicoll  Edglie  litsters  after  tryall  yranent  the  defendars 
ar  fund  in  ane  wrong  for  the  breaking  of  y""  comoune  stentreis  eftir  the  said 
Johne  Lindsay  had  reparit  the  samyn  and  therfor  they  ar  decernit  to  pay  to 
him  seavin  pundis  he  depursit  for  reparing  yrof  and  ordeinis  them  to  repair 
the  samyn  of  new  again  vpon  y''  awin  chargis  in  als  guid  ane  estate  as  it  was 
befoir  the  breaking  downe  yrof. 

Fergusone.  The  samyn  day  ther  is  twentie  markis  grantit  to  vrnq^^  James  Forgisoune 

his  sone  to  put  him  to  ane  craft. 

Craige.  The  said  day  grantis  to  Ar^  Kraig  for  ane  supplie  four  pundis  and  the 

dekin  of  the  hamermen  to  sie  the  samyn  warit  as  also  to  speik  the  wyfe  q""  he 
lyes  for  hous  roume  to  him  and  also  the  collector  to  pay  to  vmq"  Ro'  Grayes 
son  fyve  markis  for  to  buy  clothis  to  him. 

22  September  1655. 

Wrightis.  The  said   day  the  dekine  convenar  with   the  dekins  of  craftis  new  and 

old  who  for  the  most  pairt  war  pnt  the  said  dekine  conveinar  declarit  to  the 
rest  that  the  caus  of  ther  melting  was  to  cleir  ane  differance  that  war  amongs 
the  wrightis  anent  the  choysing  of  y''  dekine  for  the  zeir  enschewing  for  they 
being  yisterday  met  and  conveanit  as  the  rest  of  the  craftis  for  y'  effect  and 
the  dekine  William  Reid  having  givine  out  the  lytt  of  the  sex  masters  to  be 
voitit  that  ane  of  them  might  be  made  choyse  of  as  deikine  of  the  said  craft 
conform  to  the  ordour  in  that  and  all  vy''  calhngs  the  most  pairt  of  the  craft 
removit  and  would  not  stay  to  voit  becaus  y'  James  Elphistoune  was  not  put 
on  lytt  als  weill  as  the  rest  he  being  also  buikit  ane  qrter  m^  as  vyrs  war  to 
the  qlk  it  was  ansuerit  that  he  had  declarit  at  his  admissioun  y'  he  wold  have 
nothing  to  do  with  them  nor  ther  meittings  and  yrvpon  did  cast  downe  ane 
schilling  starling  for  his  qrter  comptis  the  zeir  enschewing  and  so  went  away 
and  accordinglie  yrto  had  newir  met  or  conveanit  with  them  all  the  zeir  yrefter 
and  the  mater  being  debatit  weill  wey'  and  considerit  wpon  be  the  said  dekine 
conveinar  and  deikenes  of  craftis  new  and  laite  it  was  resolvit  statut  and 
ordainit  that  none  sould  be  put  on  lytt  to  be  choysin  dekine  of  that  craft  nor 
no  vyf  craftis  bot  the  laull  choysine  qrter  masters  who  had  givin  y''  aithis  at 
y''  admissioun  and  had  keipit  y''  meittings  accordinglie  and  y'  conforme  to  ye 
lawdable  custume  observit  evir  hitherto  in  all  craftis.  Thaireftir  the  haill 
corporatioune  of  the  wrights  war  callit  in  who  compeirit  and  the  said  James 
Elphistoune  with  them  and  the  foirsaid  act  and  ordinance  was  declarit  to 


i655]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  323 

them  qrvpon  it  was  ansuerit  be  sundrie  of  the  said  calhng  and  the  foirsaid 
James  Elphistoune  that  the  said  James  ought  to  be  put  on  lytt  als  weill  as 
the  rest  for  y'  he  is  buikit  ane  qrter  master  as  the  rest  was  altho  he  keipit  not 
meittings  with  them  and  the  rest  war  no  more  suorne  nor  he  was  qrvpon  the 
haill  sex  masters  of  y'  craft  being  calht  vpon  and  dewhe  suorne  to  declair 
whither  they  had  gevin  y""  aithis  at  y''  admissiouns  or  not  four  of  yem  declarit 
they  did  not  remember  and  twa  of  them  to  wit  Robert  Muir  and  Gabriell 
Cumyng  affirmed  they  war  suorne  and  had  done  all  dewteis  accordinglie  qrvpon 
the  said  dekin  conveiner  and  dekins  of  craftis  appointit  thais  twa  only  to  be 
lytit  y'  y^  ane  of  them  might  be  choysin  dekine  of  the  said  craft  for  the  zeir 
to  cimie  and  it  being  appointit  be  the  said  dekine  conveinar  dekins  old  and 
new  and  be  Baillie  Neilsoune  wha  was  sittand  in  judgment  with  them  that 
the  saids  twa  persones  sould  be  pntlie  voycit  vpon  to  the  effect  y*  ane  of  them 
might  be  elected  dekine  of  the  said  craft  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  be  the  voitis  of 
swa  many  of  the  said  craft  as  did  remain  to  give  votis  and  be  the  said  baillie 
deikin  conveinar  and  far  most  pairt  of  ye  saids  haill  dekins  of  craftis  old  and 
new  the  said  Gabriell  Cuiiiying  was  made  choyse  of  and  buikit  accordinglie 
in  y  craftis  buik. 

Decimo  sexto  Octobris  1655. 

The  said  day  it  being  provin  sufficientlie  befoir  William  NeOsone  bailhe  ciarkwniawit. 
the  deacons  of  craftis  old  and  late  that  Patrick  Clark  lait  deacon  of  wivers  said 
that  Manasses  Lyle  was  not  worthie  to  beir  office  as  deacon  conveinar  ze  not 
to  be  officer  and  therfoir  he  is  wnlayed  in  fourtie  pundis  and  decemit  to  remayn 
in  ward  quhill  the  samyn  be  payit  and  quhill  he  give  satisfaction  to  the  said 
Manasses  Lyle  for  the  foirsaid  miscariage  and  wrong  as  also  the  said  Patrick 
Clark  is  declarit  vncapable  of  beiring  ony  office  in  his  craft  heirefter. 

The  said  day  Manasses  Lyle  deacon  conveinar  with  William  Neilsone  Thes  who 
bailhe  and  haill  deacons  of  craft  new  and  laitt  quho  for  the  most  pairt  war  dekirfe'^  "'^ 
pnt  and  finding  that  some  of  that  numer  had  so  misbeheaved  themselfis  to  convenaror 

wy'  dekins 

the  said  deacon  conveinar  that  it  is  not  seimlie  nor  cumlie  to  be  hard  and  for  not  to  beir 

preventing  of  the  lyk  in  tyme  curhing  it  is  therfoir  heirby  inactit  statitut  and  ^^'^"^^''■ 

ordenit  that  give  it  sail  be  found  heirefter  that  any  craftisman  qtsumevir 

sail  miscarie  or  misbehave  themselfis  in  outregious  or  vihfiing  speachis  as  hes 

bein  wsed  be  sume  heirtofoir  wnsimlie  to  be  hard  vtered  against  any  persone 

in  office  towards  the  deacon  conveinar  or  deacon  of  his  caUing  hirefter  ather 

in  privat  or  pubUct  the  samyn  being  sufficienthe  tryit  that  the  persone  quha 

sail  be  fund  guiltie  in  so  dooing  sail  be  declarit  be  the  deacon  conveinar  or  ony 

vy""  deacon  of  his  calling  quhom  he  so  wronges  with  consent  of  the  quarter 

maistirs  of  his  calling  nevir  to  be  capable  to  beir  any  office  or  charge  in  his 

respective  calling  or  deaconveinars  hous  therefter. 


324 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF   GLASGOW. 


[1655 


Lyttis  dekin 
convenar. 


Dectnw  sepiimo  Octohris  1655. 

The  said  day  the  deacon  conveinar  with  the  dekins  of  craft  and  ther 
brethrein  of  counsell  quha  for  the  most  pairt  war  pnt  being  conveinit  for  the 
choysing  of  thrie  of  ther  numer  to  be  presentit  to  the  proveist  bailleis  and 
counsell  and  vy^s  haveand  entres  that  ane  of  them  myght  be  choysin  dekin 
conveinar  for  the  zeir  to  cume  be  pluralitie  of  votis  Waltir  Neilsone  Johne 
Millar  tailzour  and  James  Duncan  war  choysne  to  be  presentit  to  the  effect 
foirsaid. 


Neilsone 

dekine 

convenar. 


And  the  samyn  day  accordinglie  the  said  Waltir  Neilsone  was  made 
choyse  of. 


PenulHmo  Octohris  1655. 

Thir  persones  fallowing  ar  appointit  and  cho3'sne  to  be  of  the  dekin  con- 
veinars  counsell  for  the  zeir  to  cum. 

Dekins 


James  Duncane 
Johne  Miller 
WiUiam  Coittis 
Johne  Scott 
Michall  Watsone 

X  William  Boyd 

X  Johne  Hall 


Jo"  Miller  visito' 
Gabriell  Cumyng 
Allex^  Holmes 
George  Clark 
Johne  Zoung 
X  WiUiam  Craig 


William  Neilsone  baillie 

Manasses  Lyle  lait  dekin  conveinar 


xAllex''  Jafra 
Johne  Bumes 
Gawin  Scott 

Johne  Maxuall 


Thomas  Campbell 
Waltir  Bryce 
Patrick  Bryce 
Johne  Muir 
Ninian  Andersone 


Johne  Ker 
James  Stirling 
Robert  Boyd 
William  Johnsone 
Johne  Birscatt 


William  Reid 
Robert  Muir 


Johne  Bar 
Johne  Caulduall 


Archbald  Andersone 


i635l         RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  325 

Thomas  Inglis  George  Broome 

Walter  M<^Calla  Robert  Broome 


Gabriell  Corbet 
James  Thomesone 

Thomas  Scott 
Johne  Glen 


Robert  Snype 
Robert  Merschell 


Androw  Jaip 


Patrick  Bryce 

Androw  Leis  Johne  Lyndsay 

Johne  Falconer 

Jo"  Rankein  Johne  Moresone 

James  Dougall 
Daniell  Broune 

The  haill  persones  abouewrittin  gave  thair  aithes  as  vse  is. 

The  said  day  the  foirsaid  haill  counsell  being  devydit  in  four  leits  to  the 
effect  that  out  of  ilk  lyte  ane  might  be  choysine  to  mak  vpe  the  four  persones 
to  sit  on  the  deane  of  gilds  counsell  for  the  zeir  to  cum  be  pluralitie  of  votis 
thir  persones  fallowing  war  electit  to  the  effect  foirsaid  Thomas  Campbell 
maltman  James  Duncan  hamerman  George  Broome  flechour  Johne  Hall 
chirurgiane. 

The  Nytein  of  November  1655. 
The  dekin  conveinar  the  dekins  of  craftis  and  thair  counsell  wha  for  the  Andersoune 
most  pairt  war  pnt  be  pluralitie  of  votis  Ninian  Andersone  maltman  is  electit 
and  choysin  colectour  to  the  hous  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  wha  being  pnt  acceptit 
and  gave  his  aith  as  wse  is. 

The  sam  day  imediatlie  thereftir  Jo"  Muir  late  colectour  made  his  coumpt 
of  his  haill  intromisioun  with  the  hospitalls  guidis  fra  Hallowmes  1654  to 
Hallowmes  last. 

In  the  first  recavit   be  him  fra  George   Broome  cyforme  to  the 

bulk  of  burgess  silver  ..... 

Item  fra  William  Ride  for  the  moneys  conteint  in  the  rentall 

himself  being  payit  for  colecting  therof 
Item  for  fyve  lyalls  and  ane  half  that  was  sold     . 
Item  from  the  new  dikens  ..... 

Item  fra  vmqll  George  Lyoun  for  twa  zeiris  arent  of  300  ll  pre- 

ceiding  Candilmes  last  ..... 

Item  fra  Michaell  Gilmour  for  his  gildrie  fynes 


47 

5 

0    Compt 
Mure. 

55 

II 

0 

10 

0 

0 

32 

0 

0 

36 

0 

0 

120 

0 

0 

326 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1655 


Item  from  M""  Batie  as  being  the  half  of  the  money  was  gottin 

from  him  for  libertie  to  sell  his  wyne  heir      .  .  .       50     o    o 

Item  for  a  pairt  of  the  Gorball  rent  the  crope  1654  qrof  evrie 

craft  wndertakers  recavit  the  lyk  according  to  thair  sowmes       66  13     4 

Item  recavit  fra  the  dikens  for  the  foirsaids  zeiris  quarter  coumpts     209     o     o 

Item  the  lait  deiken  conveinar  having  recavit  fra  the  towne  in 
name  of  Robert  Hogiszard  and  James  Watsoune  281  I1  13s. 
4d.  qrof  he  debursit  first  to  James  Duncane  late  colectour 
32  h  qlk  he  lies  comptit  for  alredie  in  his  last  coumpt  as  also 
debursit  to  the  said  James  Duncane  to  help  to  mak  wp  the 
500  merkis  he  is  awand  to  the  hous  be  his  band  in  the  box 
eftir  consideratioun  it  is  fund  that  all  the  coumpter  hes  recavit 
and  is  to  be  chargit  with  is    .  .  .  .  .     123     3     6 

Suma  of  the  charge  is         .  .  .  .     989  12  10 


Fallowis  the  coumpiers  discharge. 

In  the  first  debursit  to  the  poore  men  in  the  hous  confonne  to  the 

particulars  for  thair  ordinar  allowance         .  .  .  ( 

Item  to  ilk  ane  of  them  to  buy  schone  and  schirts  viz  evrie  one  twa 

schirtis  ...... 

Item  for  coills  and  peitis  .... 

Item  to  Mathow  Colquhoune  for  mehing  the  peich  of  the  bell 

Item  for  ane  candle  to  Wilham  Ride 

Item  for  ane  schaft  to  ane  coill  raik 

Item  to  James  Elphistoune  for  meiiing  of  ane  window    . 

Item  the  haill  zeir  to  the  pentionars 

Item  to  severall  \'y''  poore  at  the  four  severall  quarters  be  the 

warrands       ....... 

Item  debursit  to  Jenet  Connynghame  for  that  qlk  is  dew  to  hir 

for  the  arent  morteifeit  be  hir  husband  to  the  hous  be  hir 

twa  dischargis  put  in  the  box  the  zeiris  1654  and  1655 
Item  to  James  Elphistoune  for  the  making  of  ane  gles  window 

and  wyring  of  it       . 
Item  to  the  colledge  colectour  for  the  bursour  the  zeir  1654     . 
Item  to  the  clerk  for  his  fiall        ..... 
Item  for  raising  of  new  Ires  on  M''  Johne  Dunlopes  band  as  cau'' 

for  Boddellhauch      ...... 


■     27 15 

0 

•     19 19 

10 

I  10 

0 

0   I 

4 

0  3 

4 

I  0 

0 

•  144  0 

0 

156    o 


17 


7 

12 

0 

66 

13 

4 

20 

0 

0 

2     8 


Suma  of  the  discharge  is     .  .  .  .     952    4    2 

Swa  charge  and  discharge  being  compairit  the  coumpter  restis 


awand  in 


36     8     8 


i655]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  327 

Qlk  coumpt  befoir  writtin  was  red  calculat  and  laid  and  thereftir  allowit 
and  approvin  and  the  coumpter  dischargit  accordinglie  he  having  payit  in  to 
the  new  collectour  the  foirsaid  sowme  of  thiettie  sex  pundis  aught  scliilhngs 
aught  penneis. 

The  same  day  vmqll  George  Lyouns  band  and  Robert  Bankes  band  for  Anent 
20  ll  ar  given  to  the  colectour  and  he  is  to  be  chargit  therw'  and  also  Ro'  tf^'dfs.' 
Hunters  vmqll  Ro'  Snypis  and  Silvertounehills  bands  ar  put  in  the  box  as 
also  Jo"  .Miller  hes  Ro'  Cumyngs  band  conteining  24  li  qlk  is  to  be  vpliftit 
be  him  and  given  to  the  colectour  and  he  is  to  be  chargit  therwith  as  also  James 
Stirlings  band  for  150  ll  Thomas  Darimpils  band  for  the  lyk  sowme  and  ane 
band  grantit  be  Jo"  Bar  and  his  caurs  for  100  ti  wer  all  put  in  the  box. 

The  same  day  ther  was  delyverit  to  the  colectour  be  the  dekin  conveinar  Money 
for  his  entrie  conforme  to  the  act  in  satisfactioun  of  the  croslate  12  ll  and  8  ll  '^°'<^'^'°"''- 
was  gottin  fra  ilk  ane  of  the  thrie  new  dekins  and  120  ll  recavit  be  him  fra 
Jo"  Ker  for  his  gildrie  for  the  qlk  he  is  to  be  chargit  at  his  coumpt  making. 

The  same  day  ther  was  delyverit  to  the  colectour  of  money  that  was  Money 
gottin  from  burgess  thrie  scoir  nyne  pundis  sex  schillings  aught  penneis  and  '^°'^'='''"^- 
it  is  to  be  rememberit  that  George  Brome  hes  sum  money  as  zit  in  his  hand 
not  coumptit  for  qlk  the  colectour  is  to  vplift  and  to  coumpt  for  all. 

The  same  day  ther  is  delyverit  to  the  colectour  be  W'ilham  Ride  of  the  Money  rental! 
money  contenit  in  the  rentall  (himself  having  gottin  for  colecting  6  ll)  fyftie  paymentis°°" 
sex  pundis  fyve  s.  4d.  and  it  is  to  be  rememberit  that  ther  is  of  non  pay'®  57s.  'herof. 
to  witt  for  vmqll  Walter  Millars  land  (  )  Ite  for  Manasses  Lyll 

his  twa  buithis  in  Saltmercat  21s.  8d.  and  for  W'"  Conynghames  land  15s. 

The  same  day  it  is  to  be  rememberit  that  the  tailzours  is  awand  to  the  Money 
hous  400  merks  with  arentis.  taiizonrs. 

The  same  day  it  is  concluded  and  condischended  wnto  that  ther  sail  be  Fairiie. 
takin  fra  Gawin  Farhe  for  Jo"  Neipeirs  land  and  the  hous  to  give  him  thair 
right  200  merkis  he  paying  the  samyn  to  the  colectour  in  redie  money  at  leist 
w*in  (  )  dayis  and  the  colectour  to  be  chargit  thairwith. 


The  same  day  the  twa  mortclothis  belonging  to  the  hous  eftir  rouping  Money  for 

raortclothi' 
colectour. 


wer  sold  to  the  maltmen  for  the  sowme  of  fourtie  ane  punds  with  the  qlk  the  ™°''"='°""s 


colectour  is  to  be  chargit  at  the  making  of  his  coumpt. 

The  said  day  eftir  considera'un  had  be  the  dekin  conveinar  and  dekins  Who  sail  not 
of  craftis  who  for  the  maist  pairt  war  pnt  for  eshewing  of  sundrie  inormiteis  llf eTectmr 
and  wrongis  committit  heirtofoir  it  is  heirby  enactit  statitut  and  ordenit  that  °^  dekins. 
na  maner  of  persoune  or  persones  qtsumevir  of  ony  trade  or  calhng  within 


328 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[i6, 


DD 


Elphiustoun 
and  Danizell 
to  have  no 
chairge  in  y' 
calling. 


this  bm*  who  gettis  help  or  supplie  of  thair  calling  nor  yit  who  payis  not  thair 
qrter  coumptes  sail  have  no  voyce  or  consent  in  electing  or  choysing  of  the 
deikine  of  thair  calhng  in  tyme  cumyng  so  long  as  they  remain  in  that  con- 
ditioune  nor  zit  none  \-y''  persones  qtsumevir  of  ony  calling  who  wrongis  injuris 
or  abussis  thair  dekin  or  ony  of  thair  qrtermaisteirs. 

The  same  day  considera'an  being  had  be  the  said  dekin  conveinar  deikins 
of  craftis  and  thair  counsell  for  the  wrong  done  and  comittit  be  James  Elphin- 
stoun  glais  wiy'  and  Jo"  Deniell  wrj-'  to  the  lait  dekin  conveinar  Manasses 
Lyle  it  is  therfoir  heirby  enactit  statut  and  ordenit  that  they  nor  nane  of  them 
sail  beir  nor  carie  na  charge  or  functioune  in  thair  calUng  whill  first  they  give 
satisfac'un  to  him  for  the  said  wrong. 


Campbell 
prenteis. 


Decimo  quarto  Decembris  1655. 

The  said  day  James  Campbell  sone  to  Johne  Campbell  of  Dowane  is  buikit 
heirin  prenteis  with  Thomas  Campbell  maltman  during  the  space  of  fyve 
zeiris  confomie  to  the  indento''s  daitit  the  sext  day  of  Junij  last  by  past. 


Qwarto  Februarij  1656. 

For  releif  of  The  Said  day  the  dekin  conveinar  with  the  haill  threttein  deikins  of  craftis 

excys  and  ces.  ^^^  ^^^^  qrter  maisters  of  evrie  calUng  being  frequentlie  conveinit  and  all  for 
the  maist  pairt  pnt  be  pluralitie  of  voites  it  is  condischendit  and  agried  be 
them  in  name  of  the  haill  tredis  within  this  braghe  that  thair  sail  be  exactit 
and  vphftit  at  the  mylnes  of  ilk  mask  malt  of  fyve  furlotes  for  the  better 
releiving  of  the  toune  of  the  excyse  dewtie  and  ces  obleist  monethhe  to  be 
payit  be  the  toune  the  sowme  of  thrie  pund  scottis. 


Andersone 
prenteis. 


Warrand 
poor. 


15  Febrwarij  1656. 

The  said  day  Patrick  Andersoune  sone  lauU  to  vmqll  Johne  Andersoun 
sailer  is  buiket  prenteis  with  Robert  Stein  weiver  during  seavin  zeiris  as 
prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  iie  conforme  to  the  indentour  of  the  dait 
of  thir  pntis. 

18  Februarij  1656. 

The  sd  day  the  deacon  conveiner  w'  the  deacons  of  crafts  and  ther  counsell 
being  conveined  ordains  ther  colecto^  to  deburs  to  the  persons  eftspeit  the  soums 
following  to  wit  to  Jo"  \\"allace  cordoner  tuentie  marks  to  \\'"i  Calbarns  ten 
marks  to  Ar^  Craig  thrie  pund  to  Mathow  Currie  four  pund  to  James  Cuthbert 
bonnetmaker  xxx  s.  to  Jo"  Wyllie  xxx  s.  to  Helen  Otterbum  xxxiiij  s.  to 
Thomas  Merschell  and  Jo"  Risk  ilk  ane  of  them  (  )  and  to  Jo" 

Fultons  fonner  moncthly  pay'  xij  s. 


1656]         RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  329 

21  March  1656. 

The  sd  day  David  Scot  sone  lau"  to  James  Scot  in  Gieinok  is  bookit  Prenteis  Scot. 
prenteis  \v'  Jo"  Scot  taylzeo^  burges  of  this  bur'  dureing  fyve  zears  as  prenteis 
and  twa  zears  for  meat  and  fie  conform  to  ye  indentar  of  the  dait  the  second 
day  of  August  1653. 

24  of  March  1656. 

The  said  day  the  deacon  conveiner  and  the  haill  deacons  of  crafts  being  Baxteris. 
conveined  in  anser  to  the  supphcatioune  and  complaint  given  in  be  sundry 
of  the  baxters  friemen  and  burgess  of  this  bur*  ag'  w-ys  of  that  trade  heritors 
of  ther  wheat  millns  and  the  sd  deacon  conveiner  and  his  deacons  being  most 
willing  that  all  differences  and  questions  now  betwixt  them  sould  be  removeit 
for  the  better  keiping  of  peace  amitie  and  love  amongst  them  appoyntis 
Thomas  Campbell  James  Duncan  deacon  of  haihermen  Jo"  Miller  deacon  of 
tayl2eo''s  and  Jo"  Hall  deacon  of  chirurgians  to  meit  w'  the  sds  baxters  and  to 
tak  considera'une  and  notice  of  the  haill  difference  standing  amongst  them 
and  to  tak  notice  q'  is  the  crofts  pairt  of  all  gotten  at  ther  millns  and  q'  is  the 
heritors  pairt  and  q'  aither  of  yem  sould  bear  in  the  coiiioun  burdeins  incum- 
bent to  the  millnis  and  for  better  clearing  of  maters  ordains  Jo"  Scot  present 
deacon  of  baxters  to  produce  befor  them  his  last  twa  zears  comptis  that  he 
was  coUecto''  to  the  calling  that  they  may  revise  the  samein  and  the  sds  four 
persons  ar  to  vse  ther  best  endevo^s  to  aggrie  the  pties  and  to  mak  ther  report 
anent  this  particular  at  the  nLxt  belltan  court. 


The  sd  day  in  respect  thes  folloueing  to  witt  the  deacons    of    baxters  Compts  to 
flescho^s  skinners  and   bonetmakers   hes   contraveined   the  ordo''  set   doune  "^^^  °''^^ 
anent  the  making  of  ther  compts  in  not  conveining  the  crofts  baylhe  and 
wy^s  w'  ye  deacon  conveiner  quho  wer  to  be  conveined  therat  ordains  y™ 
to  mak  yer  compts  over  againe  and  to  keap  the  corhon  ordo""  set  doun  theranent. 

The  said  day  Mathow  Broune  and  NiccoU  Edglie  litsters  and  ilk  ane  of  Wrang  Broun 
them  ar  decernit  in  ane  wrong  for  the  most  schamefuU  abuseing  and  vpbraideing  '^"'^  Edghe. 
of  Johne  Lyndsay  the  present  headsman  and  oversman  of  ther  calling  quho 
is  chosen  be  them  for  that  effect  with  coiiioun  consent  with  most  lilthie  and 
detestable  words  not  worthie  again  to  be  repeatted  and  therfor  they  and  ilk 
ane  of  them  ar  vnlawit  in  the  soume  of  ten  marks  and  ordained  to  give  full 
satisfaction  to  the  ptie  offendit  be  the  sy*  of  the  deacon  conveiner  and  decons 
and  to  the  decon  conveiner  and  deacons  and  requestit  W"i  Neilsoune  bayllie 
being  present  that  they  my'  both  be  captivat  w'in  the  tolbuith  qi'  they  did 
first  perform  the  premisses  qlk  ye  sd  baylhe  granted  and  yrfor  gave  ordo"^ 
to  W"  Reid  his  officer  to  charge  them  to  ward  to  that  effect. 


330  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1656 

25  Martij  1656. 
Litsteris.  xhe  qlk  day  in  presence  of  \\''"  Nealsoune  ane  of  the  present  bayllies  of 

the  Sciid  burgh  and  \\'alter  Nealsoune  decon  conveiner  therof  compeirit  the 
haill  htsters  indwellars  and  burgess  of  the  said  bur'  vndersub^'eand  and  in 
regaird  that  on  the  xxiiij  day  of  Jlerch  instant  Mathow  Broun  and  Niccoll  Edghe 
twa  of  ther  bretherin  of  that  calhng  being  compleined  vpon  to  the  sd  decon 
conveiner  and  decons  of  crafts  for  the  filthie  and  schamles  abuse  done  be 
them  to  Jo"  Lyndsay  present  headsman  and  oversman  of  that  tred  and  calhng 
chosen  w*  ther  mutuall  consents  for  ye  tym  q"  he  did  convein  them  befor 
him  and  the  rest  of  the  bretherin  of  that  calhng  for  contraveining  certan  good 
and  laudea"  actis  that  wer  set  doune  of  befor  be  them  and  ther  predicesso'^s  of 
the  sd  calhng  for  the  good  and  well  of  the  haill  trade  and  poor  decayed  bretherin 
yerof  conform  to  ane  paper  sub'  w'  ther  hands  of  the  dait  the  thrid  day  of 
November  jajvjc  fourtie  foure  zeares  qrvpon  the  sds  Mathow  Broune  and 
Niccoll  EdgUe  wer  both  decernit  in  the  wrong  and  incarcerit  within  the  tol- 
buith  of  this  bur'  q"  they  gave  satisfactioune  therfoir  according  to  the  teno' 
of  the  act  set  doune  theranent  vpon  the  said  twentie  four  day  of  this  instant 
and  to  the  effect  that  the  haill  bretherin  of  the  sd  calling  may  be  subject  to 
good  ordo''  amongst  themselves  according  to  the  teno^  of  the  sd  paper  and 
may  leive  christianly  in  that  love  peace  and  amity  as  becometh  and  for  this 
end  to  give  that  dew  respect  to  the  present  headsman  and  wthers  who  sail 
hearefter  be  electit  and  chosen  be  consent  of  the  calhng  in  that  place  the  sds 
haill  persons  vndersub^eand  doe  hearby  bind  and  obleis  them  and  ilk  ane  of 
yem  for  ther  awin  p's  to  give  all  dew  respect  and  obedience  to  ther  sd  headsman 
and  his  successoi's  to  be  choysen  in  maner  as  sd  is  in  all  thing  as  becometh 
for  keipLng  of  good  ordo''  as  also  to  obtemper  and  obey  the  haill  actis  statuts 
and  ordinances  sett  doune  be  ther  sds  predecessoi's  and  sub'  be  yem  of  the 
dait  abovewrin  and  farder  mor  nor  is  conteined  theiin  they  hearbj'  obhs  them 
to  pay  for  the  booking  of  ilk  prenteis  four  punds  scots  and  for  ilk  servand  as 
a  jomeyman  not  serving  his  prenteischipe  in  this  bur'  sex  punds  scots  for  the 
well  of  ther  haill  calling  to  be  furthcuiiiand  to  the  vse  of  ther  poor 
decaj'ed  bretherin  and  sicklyke  that  non  of  them  sail  ht  any  cloth  to  James 
Smith  in  Duntocher  Alex''  Findlay  in  Kirkintilloch  Ro'  Thomson  in  Paislay 
or  to  any  other  person  or  persons  outw'  this  bur'  that  professes  to  be  htsters 
and  that  non  of  them  sail  bargan  or  have  anie  dealhng  w'  anie  man  that  is 
ane  vnfrieman  in  the  calling  aither  fied  or  vnfied  vpon  qtsumever  cullo'' 
pretext  to  the  prejudice  of  the  friemen  of  the  calhng  vnder  the  payn  of  fourtie 
punds  scots  for  ilk  failzie  or  breatch  and  the  sds  persons  vndersub'^'ers  to  schaw 
ther  wiUingnes  in  performance  of  the  haill  premiss  they  doe  hearby  submit 
themselvs  if  anie  of  them  sail  happen  to  contravein  hearefter  in  any  of  the 
particulars  abovewritten  or  conteined  in  the  aforsd  paper  to  ye  judgment  and 
determina'une  of  ye  present  deacon  conveiner  and  decons  of  crafts  and  ther 


1656]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  331 

successors  in  all  things  relaitting  yerto  and  to  obtemper  and  obey  all  decreats 
qtsumever  sail  be  given  out  and  pionunceit  be  them  yeranent  hearefter  but 
ony  contradictioun  qtsumever.  In  witnes  qi'of  thir  pntis  ar  sub'  at  day  zear 
and  place  forsd  befor  ther  witness  W"  Reid  and  James  Bischop  twa  of  the 
officers  of  the  sd  bur'. 

We  Niccoll  EdgUe  and  George  Findlay  twa  Johne  Lindsay  deacon 

of  ye  bretherin   forsd  w'  o''  hands  at  ye  pen.  JMathow  Browne 

I  Thomas  Scheirer  no'  pubUct  doe  sub^e  tliir  Thomas  Lining 

pnts  at  cofhand  of  Niccoll  Edglie  and  George  Mathow  Kerre 

Finlay  becaus  they  cannot  wrytt  as  they  affirm  Wilhame  Thomsoune 
witnessing  my  sign  and  sub'ion  manuall. 

14  of  Apryle  1656. 

The  said  day  Richard  Glene  sone  to  vmqll  James  Glen  in  Lochquhinnoche  Preuteis  Glen, 
is  buikit  prenteis  with  Thomas  Cowrie  gairdner  for  fyve  zeiris  and  twa  zeiris 
for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  daitit  the  tent  day  of  August  1655. 

Octavo  Maij  1656. 

The  said   day   James   Hendersoune   sone   lauU   to  James    Hendersoune  prenteis 
cordoner  is  buikit  prenteis  wit  James  Parkhill  skiner  during  sevin  zeiris  as  Hendersone. 
prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  daitit  the 
secund  of  Apryle  1652. 

Decimo  sexto  Maij  1656. 
The  sd  day  Alex^  Colquhounes  band  for  his  gildrie  was  producit  and  put  Band 

in  the  box.  Colquhoun. 

The  same  day  the  dekin  convenir  dekinis  of  crafts  and  yr  brethrein  of  Barclay, 
counsell  being  conveinit  and  talking  to  thair  considera'un  the  baise  and  lewd 
cariage  and  speachis  done  and  vtered  be  James  Barclay  to  James  Duncane 
his  dekin  they  first  all  debare  him  of  his  charge  w'in  the  dekin  conveinars 
hous  or  meltings  and  ordaines  him  nevir  to  have  ane  voyce  in  his  calling  heir- 
efter  and  to  pay  ane  new  vpsett  of  fourtie  punds  for  the  vse  of  the  poore  of 
his  calhng  and  to  remaine  in  ward  whill  that  be  payit  and  to  give  satis- 
factioune  to  the  pairtie  offendit  be  sight  of  the  dekin  conveinar  and  dekins. 

The  sd  day  ordaines  the  colecto""  to  put  Whytsydis  band  to  executioune.  Whytsyde. 

The  same  day  for  peitie  and  coihisera"un  hade  towards  the  bairnes  of  Colecto'. 
vmqll  Phillane  Snype  thair  is  quyt  to  them  twa  zeirs  arent  of  fyve  hundreth 
merkis  that  was  awand  be  thair  father  to  the  hous  and  ordaines  the  colecto"' 
to  receave  the  priiill  soume. 


332 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1656 


Chirurgiouni.  The  Same  day  it  was  declaired  be  the  dekin  of  chirurgiounes  that  q'as 

thair  calUng  was  in  vse  to  pay  of  auld  to  the  hous  fyve  merkis  zeirhe  for  the 
vse  of  the  pocre  in  the  hospitall  they  war  now  content  [to  pay]  ten  merks 
zeirHe  and  to  begin  at  this  terme. 

Baxteris.  The  said  day  ordanis  thais  quha  war  formeriie  appoyntit  to  agrie  the  baxters 

to  settle  that  mater  and  to  bring  it  to  ane  clois. 

Frndlay.  jj^g  same  day  for  divers  and  sundrie  considera'uns  the  colecto''s  pnt  and 

to  cume  ar  appoyntit  to  pay  qrterhe  to  Robert  Findlay  elder  cordoner  fyve 
punds  scots  money  and  to  begine  this  qrter. 

Divyder  of  his  The  Same  day  it  is  wnanimuslie  agried  and  concludit  be  the  dekin  convenar 

calling.  .    " 

dekins  and  thair  counsall  quha  for  the  maist  pairt  war  present  that  give  ony 
brother  of  ony  calling  \v*in  this  brughe  sail  vse  any  meins  q'sumevir  heirefter 
to  devyde  his  calhng  that  he  sail  be  cutt  of  that  his  calling  as  ane  rottin  member 
and  as  one  not  worthie  to  keep  sosiatie  with. 


Vigesimo  primo  Maij  1656. 

The  sd  day  James  Cuttile  sone  to  vmqll  Johne  Cuttill  in  Kersay  Bank 
is  bookit  prenteis  w'  Johne  Miller  present  visitour  of  maltmen  for  the  space 
of  seavin  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  servand  conforme  to  the  indentour  of  the  dait 
of  thir  pnts. 

Vigesimo  tertio  Maij  1656. 

The  sd  day  the  dekin  conveinar  and  dekins  of  crafts  being  conveinit  the 
contraversie  betwixt  Walter  Main  potter  and  his  prenteis  is  referit  for  the 
pairt  of  the  sd  Walter  to  Johne  MiUar  visitour  and  Johne  Zung  coupar  and 
for  the  prenteis  pairt  to  James  Duncane  and  George  Clark. 

Braidie  agent.  The  said  day  it  is  wnanimuslie  concluded  that  Williame  Braidie  sail  be 

coinoune  agent  for  the  dekin  conveinar  and  dekins  for  qt  they  have  to  doe  in 
Ed''  and  he  to  have  zeirlie  during  y''  pleasour  allenerlie  twentie  punds  out  of 
the  hous  and  the  colecto''  to  pay  him  presentlie  this  zeir. 


Prenteis 
Cuttill. 


Maine  and  his 
prenteis. 


Prenteis 
Armour. 


Prenteis 
Ingleis. 


Decimo  Junij  1656. 

The  same  day  Thomas  Armour  sone  to  Ro'  Armour  is  buikit  prents  w* 
Alex''  Maxwell  maltmane  conforme  to  the  indentour  daitit  the  twentie  aught 
of  March  last. 

Decimo  nono  J ulij  1656. 

The  said  day  Thomas  Ingleis  sone  natourall  to  Thomas  Ingleis  tanner 
burges  of  this  brughe  is  buikit  prenteis  with  his  said  father  during  the  space 
of  seavin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  thairefter  for  meit  and  fie  conforme 
to  the  indentour  of  the  dait  the  alleivint  day  of  Febrwar  jajvjc  fyftie  thrie 
zeiris. 


1656]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  333 

Decimo  octavo  Angiistj  1656. 

The  said  day  it  was  fund  and  heirby  declairit  be  the  dekin  conveinar  Mitchell. 
dekins  of  craftis  and  yr  counsell  that  James  Mitchell  quha  was  bund  prenteis 
w'  Walter  Maine  potter  his  fullfillit  to  him  his  indentour  and  yrfore  ordaines 
the  sd  \\'alter  to  give  him  ane  discharge  of  his  prenteischip  accordinglie. 

The  said  day  ordaines  the  colectour  to  lend  to  Thomas  Milleir  maltmane  Miller 
vpone  his  band  fourtie  merkis  to  help  to  buy  ane  hors  and  to  pay  to  Thomas  **"'^"  ■ 
Cochrane  ten  punds  for  his  supplie  and  ordaines  the  sd  colectour  to  pay  of 
new  againe  to  Thomas  Andersoune  waiver  the  twelf  schillings  monethlie  that 
was  formerlie  tackin  of  him. 

The  same  day  ordaines  the  colectour  to  pay  to  the  visitour  of  maltmen  Gorbaiircnt. 
and  remanent  dekins  of  craftis  quha  has  interest  in  the  rent  of  the  landis  of 
the  Gorballs  thair  proportionall  pairtis  of  the  samy  according  to  his  receptis 
from  William  Colquhoune  and  that  for  the  crope  1654  zeiris. 

Decimo  quinto  Septembris  1656. 

The  said  day  the  dekin  conveinar  with  his  deikins  of  craftis  being  con-  Barclay, 
veinit   James  Barclay  hamermane   is  restorit  again   be   them   to  his  former 
libertie  and  he  is  to  pay  twentie  merkis  for  his  fault  and  give  he  be  fund  in 
the  lyk  fault  heirefter  he  is  never  to  have  voyce  in  his  calling  nor  zit  in  the 
dekin  conveinars  hous. 

Vigesimo  tertio  Sepris  1656. 

The  said  day  George  Hall  sone  laull  to  Johne  Hall  cairter  is  bookit  prenteis  Prenteis  Hall, 
with  Androw  Findlay  skiner  during  the  space  of  seavin  zeiris  and  twa  zeiris 
for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  daitit  the  twentie  thrie  of  Nove'' 
last. 

Penuliimo  Septembris  1656. 

The  said  day  Walter  Neilsoune  dekin  conveinar  with  the  haill  dekins  of  peiris  and 
craftis  new  and  old  quha  for  the  maist  pairt  war  present  and  haveing  hard  now  p°en°ej^'' 
and  of  before  the  severall  complainits  given  in  be  George  Peiris  curriour  against 
Androw  Pollok  his  prenteis  and  be  the  said  prenteis  against  his  said  maister 
and  finding  be  the  indentour  producit  his  prenteischipe  to  be  outrune  becaus 
they  could  not  leive  togither  in  peace  and  amitie  be  pluralitie  of  voitis  it  was 
declairit  be  the  sd  dekin  conveinar  dekins  of  craftis  new  and  old  that  the  said 
Androw  Pollok  prenteis  was  trie  of  his  prenteischipe  in  respect  they  find  the 
samyn  expyrit  be  the  indentour  producit  reservand  to  the  said  George  his 
maister  hbertie  to  persew  his  said  prenteis  befoir  the  ordinar  judge  for  any 
wrong  or  ceivill  debt  he  can  lay  to  his  charge. 


334  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1656 

Octavo  Odobris  1656. 

Lyttis.  The  qlk  day  Walter  Neilsoune  dekin  conveinar  with  the  dekins  of  craft 

being  conveinit  quha  for  the  most  pairt  war  present  for  electing  twa  of  ther 
number  to  be  presentit  with  the  said  Walter  Neilsoune  this  day  to  be  presentit 
to  the  provest  bailleis  and  counsell  of  this  brughe  to  the  effect  that  on  of  them 
might  be  nominat  and  electit  dekin  conveinar  of  this  brughe  for  the  zeir 
enshewing  be  pluralitie  of  voitis  Williame  Neilsoune  and  Manasses  Lyill  war 
electit  to  be  presentit  with  the  said  Walter  Neilsoune  to  the  efiEect  foirsaid 
and  the  lytis  to  be  presentit  be  the  dekins  of  hamermen  and  tailzours. 


Neiisone  The  Same  day  the  afoirsaid  Walter  Neilsoune  being  conteinowed  dekin 

conveinar  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  thir  persoun 
his  counsall  for  the  zeir  enschewing  to  wit. 


dekme  conveinar  for  ane  zeir  to  cum  thir  persounes  fallowing  ar  nominat  to  be  on 

convenar.  '^  ° 


Alex''  Jafra  Patrick  Bryce 

Robert  Caratheris  Johne  Otterburne 

Walter  Mi^Cala  George  Broome 

Johne  Buchannane  James  Feadie 

Johne  Falcuner  Robert  Merschell 

Williame  Boyd  Androw  Jape 
James  Thomsoune 

Johne  Hall  baillie 

James  Duncane  Wilham  Neilsoune 

David  Robisoune  Thomas  Campbell 

Johne  Bumis  Johne  Millar 

James  Brounlie  Walter  Br>'ce 

Gawin  Scott  Niniane  Andersoune 

Johne  Millar  Gabriell  Cumyng 

Robert  Boyd  Alex^  Danizell 

Johne  Ker 

Johne  Birsket 

Thomas  M'^Cuir  Alex^  Holmes 

Robert  Bankis 

Williame  Coatis 

Thomas  Inglis  Manasses  Lyill 

Mathow  Wilsoune  George  Clark 

James  Thomsoune 

Robert  Stein 

Robert  Snype 
Johne  Young 


i656] 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


335 


Michaell  Watsoune 

Patrick  Bryce 

Williame  Falcuner  Williame  Craig 

Johne  Rankein  George  Findlay 

Johne  Lindsay 
Daniell  Broune 

Johne  Moresoune 
James  Dougall 

Decimo  quarto  Novembris  1656. 
The  qlk  daj'  Niniane  Andersoune  lait  colecto"'  made  compt  of  his  haill 
intromissioune  and  debursmentis  of  the  haill  moneyis  intromittit  with  and 
debursit  be  him  belonging  to  the  hospitall  this  last  zeir  qrof  charge  and  dis- 
charge is  as  fallowis  and  first  the 

Charge. 
In  the  first  the  coumpter  chargis  himself  with  the  sowme  fallowing 

he  receavit   fra  the  last  colecto""  that  he  was  fund  restand 

awand  at  the  macking  of  his  coumpt 
Item  receavit  of  qrter  coumptis  fra  the  threttein  dekins  including 

also  yrin  the  litsteris  and  gairdneris 
Item  receavit  fra  the  dekin  conveinar  in  lew  of  his  corslate 
Item   receavit   fra   the   lait   deikins  of  weivars   maissounis  and 

wrightis  in  lew  of  ther  swordis 
Item  receavit  fra  James  Duncane  for  the  last  zeiris  burgess  silver 
Item  receavit  fra  Williame  Reid  for  the  rentall  . 
Item  from  the  maltmen  for  the  old  mortclothis    . 
Item  fra  Johne  Ker  for  his  gildrie  fyne    . 
Item  fra  M""  Johne  Dunlope  that  he  was  awand  as  cau""  for  vmq" 


Bodallhaugh  ..... 

Item  fra  George  Broome  that  was  restand  in  his  hand  of  burgess 

silver  ...... 

Item  fra  Robert  Bankis  that  he  was  restand  of  his  gildrie  fyne 
Item  fra  Gawin  Fairlie  for  the  right  the  hous  made  him  to  vmqll 

Johne  Napers  land  .... 

Item  fra  Robert  Cumyng  that  he  was  awand  be  band     . 
Item  fra  the  airis  of  vmqll  Phillane  Snype  that  was  awand  be 

band  ...... 

Item  fra  James  Knox  for  his  gildrie  fyne 

Item  fra  Thomas  Dalrimpill  for  his  gildrie  fyne    . 

Item  from  the  tailzouris  colecto""  qlk  the  sd  craft  was  awand  to  the 

hous  restand  of    ther  proportionall    pairt  of   the   landis  of 

Gorballs  of  prifill  soume       ..... 


210 
12 

24 
69 

56 

41 
120 


13 
o 

o 
6 

5 
o 
o 


Compt 

Andersoune. 


36    6    8 


240     o     o 


12 

18 

0 

20 

0 

0 

133 

6 

8 

24 

0 

0 

333 

6 

8 

120 

0 

0 

100 

0 

0 

266  13    4 


336 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1656 


Item  fra  George  Weinzet  for  his  gildrie  fyne 

Item  fra  Williame  Colquhoune  as  ane  pairt  of  the  Gorball  rent 

to  ane  coumpt  for  the  crope  1654      .... 
Item  receavit  fra  the  persounis  efterspeit  for  the  hospitalls  fourt 

pairt  of  the  landis  of  Gorballs  the  crope  1655. 
Imprimis  fra  Johne  Maxwell 
Item  fra  George  Murdoch 
Item  fra  James  Rankein 
Item  fra  James  Cumyng 
Item  fra  Williame  Murdoch 
Item  fra  Robert  Scheillis 

Item  fra  Johne  Muir        .... 
Item  fra  James  Andersoune  and  James  Muir 
Item  receavit  of  arents  fra  the  relict  of  George  Lyoune 
Item  of  arents  fra  James  Duncane 
Item  of  arent  fra  Robert  Hunter 

,    Suina  of  the  haill  charge  is 


150 


381  II     2 


23 

6 

0 

52 

3 

8 

7 

3 

10 

45 

9 

2 

22 

0 

0 

18 

8 

0 

12 

8 

2 

41 

5 

0 

18 

0 

0 

20 

0 

0 

30 

17 

0 

Discharge. 

In  the  first  debursit  be  the  coumpter  to  the  sex  poore  men  in  the 

hous  at  48  li  the  peice     inde 
Item  to  the  deceist  James  Craig 

Item  to  the  womane  that  keepit  him  the  tyme  of  his  sickness 
Item  for  ane  kist  wnding  scheit  and  expenss  of  the  said  deceist 

James  Craigis  buriall  .... 

Item  for  schone  to  the  sex  poore  men  in  the  hous  and  the  said 

deceist   James  Craig  .... 

Item  for  cloth  to  be  sarkis  to  them 
Item  for  ane  barrow  and  speed  schaft     . 
Item  for  cloth  to  them  clothis      .... 
Item  for  lynings  to  them  .... 

Item  for  cloth  to  be  ane  pair  of  scheitis  to  Thomas  Naismith 
Item  for  maiking  of  y''  clothis     .... 
Item  for  ane  pair  of  scheitis  to  Ro'  Scott 
Item  for  coillis  and  peitis  the  haill  zeir     . 
Item  to  Thomas  Andersoune  Margrat  Davidsoune  James  Ogilvie 

Catherein  Andersoune  Johne  Fultoune  of  monethhe  pentioun 

the  haill  zeir  ...... 

Item   to  Gabriell  Wilsoune   for   charging  and  denuncing  of   M'' 

Johne   Dunlope         ...... 

Item  for  regra'une  of  the  Ires  writting  ane  coppie  yrof  and  ane 

instrument  ...... 


288     0  0 

24    o  o 

8  12  o 

12     I  4 


14 

0 

0 

24 

10 

0 

0 

15 

0 

52 

0 

0 

4 

8 

4 

3 

4 

0 

4 

4 

0 

4 

12 

0 

18 

19 

2 

50 

12 

0 

I 

10 

0 

254 


1656]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 

Item  to  Williame  Braidie  ..... 

Item  to  James  Mudie  for  tacking  of  the  said  M''  Johne    . 

Item  to  officers  and  souldier  to  assist  him 

Item  for  giveing  ane  charge  to  the  mess' 

Item  for  the  coumpters  awin  chargis  and  his  hors  hyre  in  going 

to  Ed'  yranent         ...... 

Item  to  colledge  collecto''  for  the  burssar 

Item  to  WilHame  Reid  to  by  ane  pair  of  schone  . 

Item  for  twa  load  lyme  four  loade  sand  twa  cairt  staines  and 

mixing  of  the  lyme  and  to  ane  maissoune  for  cloising  of  ane 

window  yrwith  ...... 

Item  for  the  dennar  to  thes  quha  mett  the  houss  fourt  pairt  of 

the  Gorballs 
Item  to  the  men  that  mett  it 
Item  for  regrating  of  Ro*  Hunters  band 
Item  to  the  post  for  cawing  of  them 
Item  to  James  Mudie  for  charging  him 
Item  to  W"  Braidie  be  warrand 
M'  spent  w'  him  in  drink 
Item  to  the  dark  for  his  flail 
Item  lent  to  Thomas  Miller  vpon  band 
Item  for  clothis  to  vmqll  Elizaser  Hamiltounes  sone  and  mack 

yrof  be  warrand 
Item  debursit  of  the  money  gottin  in  for  the  Gorballs  as  fallow 

for  the  crope  1654 
Imprimis  to  the  coupers 
Item  to  the  maltmen 
Item  to  the  wrightis 
Item  to  the  skinners 
Item   to  the  weivers 
Item  to  the  cordoners 
Item  to  the  tailzours 
To  the  baxters    . 
Item  to  the  maissounis 
Item  to  divers  poore  at  the  four  qrters  in  the  zeir  in  anser  to  yr 

bills  given  in  ...  . 

Item  lent  out  vpone  band  to  Williame  Coatis 
Item  lent  to  Johne  Colquhoune  vpone  band 
Item  lent  to  Williame  Andersoune  you'  of  Newtoune 


337 


4 

4 

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

6 

0 

8 

0 

0 

66 

13 

4 

3 

0 

0 

3  10     o 


7 

0 

0 

8 

0 

0 

4 

ID 

0 

0 

4 

0 

3 

0 

0 

20 

0 

0 

6 

15 

0 

20 

0 

0 

26 

13 

4 

440 


12   6 

0 

•   73  17 

0 

.   12  6 

2 

24  12 

4 

12  6 

2 

24  12 

4 

■   73  17 

0 

•    6  3 

I 

•    6  3 

J- 

I 

■  117  3 

4 

•  333  6 

8 

.  666  13 

4 

•  333  6 

8 

Suma  of  the  haill  discharge  is 

twa  thousand  fyve  hundreth  alleivin  pundis  xiij  s.  vj  d. 


338 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1656 


Sua  charge  and  discharge  being  compairit  ther  is  fund  restand  in  tlie 
coumpters  hand  twa  hundreth  twa  pundis  is.  vj  d.  qrof  he  producit  ane  hand 
of  ane  hundieth  punds  grantit  be  James  Bell.  Item  debursit  be  him  fourtie 
aught  pundis  xiiij  s.  qlk  with  fyftie  ane  punds  sex  shiUings  was  gottin  from 
Baillie  Hall  of  the  last  zeiris  burgess  made  vpe  ane  hundreth  punds  lent  to 
Johne  Neill  and  his  can"'  be  his  band  producit  and  so  yr  restis  yit  yrof  in  the 
coumpters  hand  fyftie  thrie  pundis  vij  s.  vj  d. 

Bandis.  The  same  day  the  colecto^  produceit  thir  bandis  fallowing  to  wit  ane  band 

grantit  be  Johne  Colquhoune  wright  and  his  caul's  for  payment  of  the  soume 
of  ane  thousand  merkis  money  ane  band  grantit  be  \V"'  Andersoune  yungar 
of  Newtoune  containing  the  soume  of  fyve  hundreth  merkis  money  ane  band 
grantit  be  W""  Coatis  and  his  caul's  conteining  the  soume  of  fyve  hundreth 
merkis  Item  ane  band  grantit  be  the  sd  Johne  Neill  for  the  sd  soume  of  ane 
hundreth  pundis  qlkis  wer  all  put  in  the  box  and  the  sd  James  Bells  band  for 
ane  hundreth  punds  vmqll  George  Lyounis  band  and  Whytsydis  band  ar  in 
the  colecto's  handis. 

CoUecto'.  The  same  day  the  afoirnamit  Niniane  Andersoune  lait  colecto''  be  pluraUtie 

of  woitis  is  conteinowit  colecto''  for  ane  zeir  to  cum. 


'^«"'3U  The  said  day  the  soume  containit  in  the  rental!  extending  to  thrie  scoir 

money  ■'  ° 

colecto'.  (  )  Willinmc  Rcid  producit  yrof  thrie  scoir  twa  punds  four 

schillings  four  penneis  qrof  ther  was  given  himself  back  for  his  pains  in  colecting 
of  it  sex  pundis  qlk  with  thrie  punds  twelf  schillings  of  non  paymentis  given 
in  and  allowit  compleitis  the  haill  rentall  qlk  thrie  scoir  t\\'a  pundis  four 
schillings  four  penneis  was  yrefter  given  to  tlie  colecto''. 

Hammermen.  The  said  day  Complaint  being  made  in  presence  of  the  dekin  conveinar 

dekins  of  craftis  and  vy''  brethrein  of  thair  counsell  quha  for  the  most  pairt 
war  present  by  Alex""  Jafra  present  dekin  of  hamcrmen  witliin  this  brughe  for 
himself  and  in  name  of  the  brethrein  of  that  calling  against  Gilbert  Moresoune 
ane  of  the  brethrein  of  the  tailzour  craft  yrin  for  that  albeit  diveris  complaints 
hes  bein  made  hcirtofoir  be  the  brethrein  of  the  saidler  trcd  quha  ar  ane  pairt 
and  pendicle  of  the  saids  hamcrmen  craft  against  W'illiame  Knox  tailzour  and 
vy'is  for  exerceising  of  the  saidler  trade  in  scheping  and  schewing  coveringis 
to  saidlis  paidis  and  foot  mantills  to  women  saidills  qlk  they  wer  dischargit  to 
doe  or  exerce  heirtofoir  conforme  to  ane  extractit  act  producit  for  that  effect 
importand  the  samyn  and  that  now  the  said  Gilbert  Moresoune  had  slightit 
and  brockin  thais  actis  and  coiTiittit  the  contrarie  in  scheping  and  schewing 
ane  covering  to  ane  saidill  qrwith  he  was  apprcheiulit  and  the  samy  tacken 
from  him  quha  compeirand  did  confese  and  ackawledge  the  samyn  but 
protestit  it  was  done  out  of  ignorance  be  him  being  altogither  ignorant  and 
wnaqucnt  with  the  former  act  sett  doune  yranent  he  being    ane   strainger 


1657]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  339 

laitlie  cum  heir  qlk  he  had  bein  loth  to  have  done  if  he  had  knowin  the  samyn 
and  the  said  mater  being  weill  wej-ed  be  the  said  dekin  conveinar  dekins  of 
craftis  and  yr  brethrein  of  counsell  foirsaid  conveinit  they  doe  heirby  enact 
statute  and  ordaine  that  none  of  the  brethrein  of  the  said  tailzour  craft  presume 
nor  tack  vpone  hand  to  medle  with  or  mack  any  thing  qtsumever  belongis  to 
the  said  saidler  trade  heirefter  as  in  scheping  schewing  covering  or  harnisching 
of  clothis  to  horss  and  that  vnder  the  paine  of  twentie  pundis  scottis  money  to 
be  payit  ay''  be  the  broyr  or  brethrein  of  the  saids  tailzouris  quha  does  heirefter 
contravein  or  then  to  be  payit  be  the  dekin  of  the  tailzouris  and  bodie  of  that 
calling  give  the  pairtie  apprehendit  and  fund  culpable  sail  declair  and  mack 
good  that  it  is  done  and  coniittit  be  him  thrughe  ignorance  for  lack  of  intima-une 
of  this  act  from  the  dekin  and  mi's  of  the  calling  qlk  twentie  punds  is  to  be 
payit  in  to  the  sds  hamermen  in  caice  foirsaid. 

Vigesit?w  octavo  Novembris  1656. 

The  said  day  James  Brounsyd  is  bookit    heirin    prenteis  with    Johne  Prenteis 
Gibsoune  weiver  during  the  space  of  fyve  zeiris  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie 
conforme  to  the  indentour  of  the  dait  of  thir  presentis. 


Brounsvd. 


Decimo  quinto  Decembris  1656. 

The  said  day  appoyntis  Baillie  Hall  Mannasses  Lyill  Thomas  Campbell  Cordoneris. 
and  George  Broome  to  meit  and  considder  vpone  the  complaint  given  in  be 
the  schoomakers  against  the  tanneris  or  barkeris  and  to  give  in  yr  verdictis 
anent  thair  best  composing  yrof  and  the  bill  is  given  to  the  dekin  of  the  cor- 
doneris to  anser  to. 


Decimo  septimo  Decembris  1656. 

The  said  day  James  Bryce  sone  laull  to  James  Bryce  in  Bamuhe  is  buikit  Prenteis 
prenteis  w'  Johne  Cors  yungar  wright  during  the  space  of  sea\'in  zeiris  and 
twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  of  the  dait  of  thir  pntis. 


Bryce. 


Vigesimo  Decembris  1656. 

The  said  day  Alex''  PoUoik  maissoune  is  bookit  prenteis  with    Johne  Prenteis 
Rankein  maissoune  conforme  to  the  indentour  of  the  dait  the  26  of  Januarij 
1653- 


PoUoik. 


Septimo  Januarij  1657. 

The  said  day  David  Corse  sone  laull  to  David  Corse  in  Carmyle  is  bookit  Prenteis 
prenteis  w'  Johne  Cors  mylne  wright  during  the  space  of  seavin  zeiris  conforme 
to  the  indentour  of  the  dait  of  thir  pntis. 


Corse. 


340 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1657 


Blackwood 
and  Campbell 
his  prenteis. 


Cordoneris. 


Prenteis 
Colquhoime. 


Duodecimo  Jantiarij  1657. 
The  said  day  in  anser  to  the  complaint  given  in  be  Colein  Campbell 
prenteis  to  Androw  Blackwood  and  be  his  mother  and  Archibald  Cowrie  thair 
cautioner  appojTitis  and  ordaines  the  said  Androw  to  give  them  all  thrie  ane 
discharg  of  the  haill  obleisments  conteinit  in  the  indento''s  past  betwixt  them 
for  all  zeiris  and  tymes  3'rof  bygaine  and  ordaines  the  prenteis  to  serve  his 
sd  m''  as  becumeth  the  tyme  yrof  zit  to  rune  and  the  m''  to  instruct  the  prenteise 
at  the  fyre  as  becumeth  be  sight  of  the  dekin. 

The  said  day  Walter  Neilsoune  dekin  conveinar  with  dekins  of  craftis 
new  and  old  being  conveinit  quha  for  the  maist  pairt  war  present  togither  w' 
Johne  Hall  ane  of  the  present  bailleis  of  the  said  brugh  and  haveing  tackin 
to  thair  considera-une  ane  bill  given  in  be  Hew  Andersoune  and  James  Mitchell 
cordoneris  for  themselfis  and  in  name  of  the  remanent  schoomakers  within 
this  brughe  adherent  to  them  schewing  the  great  hurt  detriment  and  skaith 
susteinit  be  the  poore  handle  craftismen  of  the  cordoner  craft  thrugh  the 
abundance  of  wnsufficient  tannit  lethir  sold  be  the  tanneris  and  barkeris  of 
this  brughe  to  them  q'thrughe  oft  txva\s  the  haill  work  or  maist  pairt  y''of 
that  the  saids  poore  handle  craftismen  makis  ar  tackin  from  them  and  confiscat 
q"  they  bring  them  to  the  mercat  to  sell  publictlie  and  that  all  thrughe  the 
wnsufficiencie  of  the  lethir  nather  will  thais  tanners  or  barkeris  suffer  thair 
lethir  to  be  sightit  as  they  aught  to  doe  and  all  thes  abuss  and  many  mae  ar 
gottin  borne  thrugh  be  putting  of  the  most  quaUfied  schoomakeris  of  the 
calling  quha  meddills  not  \\'ith  barking  or  taning  to  have  any  charge  in  the 
said  craft  as  dekin  or  qrter  m''s  craveing  yrfore  that  the  said  dekin  conveinar 
with  the  saids  dekins  old  and  new  may  ordaine  that  the  most  quahfied  schoo- 
makeris of  the  calling  quha  meddills  not  with  barking  or  taning  may  be  made 
equall  in  number  of  quarterm''s  efter  Michalmes  nixt  to  cum  for  preventing 
of  thais  eivills  and  the  lyk  as  thair  crafts  chartour  holdis  out  appojTiting  the 
dekin  and  his  twelf  maisteris  to  be  choysine  out  of  the  best  and  most  quahfied 
workmen  as  the  said  bill  mair  fuUie  proportis  qlk  being  red  and  considderit 
vpone  as  said  is  be  pluralitie  of  voitis  it  is  concludit  for  the  better  setling  of 
peice  and  amitie  amongst  the  brethrein  of  the  said  cordoner  craft  that  at 
Michalmes  nixt  and  yrefter  zeirlie  thair  be  chosin  out  of  the  calling  sex  of  the 
maist  qualified  craftismen  quha  does  not  medle  with  taning  or  barking  of 
lethir  to  be  the  half  of  the  quartermaisteris  of  the  said  craft  and  so  to  con- 
teinow  in  all  tyme  heirefter. 

Decimo  quinto  Januarif  1657. 
The  quhilk  day  Johne  Colquhoune  sone  laull  to  Robert  Colquhoun  in 
Overdalhome  is  bookit  prenteis  with  Johne  Colquhoune  wright  during  the 
space  of  seavin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  yrefter  for  meit  and  fie  conforme 
to  the  indento''s  daitit  the  threttein  and  aught  dayis  of  Februarij  and  March 
last  by  past. 


16573        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  341 

Quinto  Februarij  1657. 

The  quhilk  day  James  Thompsoune  sone  laull  to  Gabriell  Thompsoune  Prenteis 
in  Langsyd  is  bookit  prenteis  with  Alex^  Danizell  wright  during  the  space  of  Thompsoune. 
seavin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  yrefter  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to 
the  indentouris  daited  the  seavin  and  aught  dayis  of  Appryle  last. 


The  said  day  Walter  M'^Cala  sone  laull  to  vmqll  Johne  M<^Cala  in  Nather-  Prenteis 
toune  of  Garscuib  is  bookit  prenteis  with  Mathow  M<^Cala  cordoner  during 
the  space  of  fyve  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  yrefter  for  meit  and  fie  con- 
forme  to  tlie  indentours  daitit  the  twentie  sex  of  Appryle  jajvjc  fyftie  four 
zeiris. 

Wndecimo  Februarij  1657. 
The  qlk  day  WiUiame  Reid  sone  laull  to  vmqll  James  Reid  workmane  in  Prenteis  Reid. 
Glasgow  is  buikit  prenteis  with  Johne  Muir  elder  weiver  during  the  space  of 
fyve  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  yrefter  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the 
indentofs  of  the  dait  of  thir  pntis. 

Decimo  nono  Febrwarij  1657. 
The  same  day  the  band  of  Alex''  Colquhoune  maltmane  grantit  be  him  Bandis 
for  his  gildrie  fyne  is  tackin  out  and  given  to  the  colecto"'  and  James  Duncanes  and'^Duu^ne. 
old  [band]  of  500  merkis  is  tackin  out  of  the  box  and  given  him  vpe  and  yr 
is  put  in  it  ane  new  band  conteining  1000  merkis  w'  ane  seasing  of  his  land 
in  securitie  yrof. 

The  same  day  appoyntis  BailUe  Hall  to  agrie  George    Peiris    and    his  Peiris  and  his 
prenteis  and  his  cau'''^  becaus  the  difference  among  them  is  frilie  remittit  be 
baith  pairteis. 

The  same  day  appoyntis  Thomas  Campbell  Jo°  Millar  James  Duncane  Gorballland. 
and  the  coUecto"'  to  reveis  the  Gorball  landis  belonging  to  the  craftis  and  to 
sett  doune  ane  perfyt  not  to  quhom  and  how  the  samyn  is  sett  and  to  give 
it  to  the  clarke  that  the  tackis  yrof  may  be  drawin  vpe. 

The  same  day  appoyntis  the  colecto''  to  pay  out  to  help  to  put  the  sone  Warrand. 
of  vmqll  Elyazer  Hamiltoune  to  ane  craft  twentie  merkis  q"  he  is  put  yrto 
as  also  to  pay  Heilein  Jafra  relict  of  vmqll  Johne  Smelie  maltmane  for  help  of 
hirself  and  hir  four  young  bairns  ten  merkis. 

Peniiltimo  Febrwarij  i(>S7- 
The  dekin  conveinar  and  dekins  of  craftis  being  conveinit  with  Jo°  Hall  Peiris  and  his 
ane  of  the  pnt  bailleis  yrof  and  report  being  made  that  honest  men  to  quhom  ^^^^  ^'*' 
the  mater  betwixt  George  Peiris  and  his  prenteis  was  emittit  had  given  out 
y"^  verdick  theranent  and  that  the  sd  George  had  now  disasentit  yrfra  it  is 


342 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1657 


Borrowfeild. 


Reid. 


Couparis. 


Warrand. 


Craftis  in 
Gorballis. 


Prenteis  Park. 


3'rfore  concludit  be  pluralitie  of  voitis  that  the  sd  George  be  put  in  ward  and 
deteinit  yrin  whill  he  setle  with  his  prenteis  according  as  Thomas  Campbell 
and  vyrs  hes  setht  y™  the  said  mater  being  referit  to  them  be  both  pairteis 
pubUctlie. 

The  said  day  it  being  fund  be  the  coumpts  of  vmqll  Williame  Millar  and 
Arthour  Tackatis  that  the  fyve  hundreth  merkis  that  was  sumtj'me  awand 
be  George  Duncane  of  Borrowfeld  was  paj-it  and  haill  arentis  yrof  and  con- 
vertit  againe  for  the  vse  of  the  hospitall  and  that  now  Cristein  Zair  the  relict 
and  exerix  of  the  said  defunct  declairis  schoe  cannot  gett  hir  decreit  of 
exoneratioune  of  exerie  past  whill  first  schoe  gett  ane  discharge  yrof  to  produce 
becaus  schoe  did  gett  non  when  shoe  did  pay  the  debt  but  only  gat  \-pe  his 
band  qlk  is  now  tint  ordaines  yrof  the  colector  to  subscryve  to  hir  ane  discharge 
yrof  and  this  to  be  his  warrand. 

The  said  day  ordainis  the  colector  to  give  W™  Reid  officiar  ane  pair 
schooes. 

Sexto  Martij  1657. 

The  said  day  it  is  concludit  be  the  deldn  conveinar  and  dekins  of  craftis 
as  alio  inhibit  and  dischargit  be  them  that  it  sail  not  be  leassum  to  any  craftis- 
mane  within  this  burghe  except  couparis  to  buy  stingis  to  sell  overgaine  bot 
for  yr  awine  proper  vse  whill  first  the  coupers  refuse  to  buy  the  samyn  from 
those  that  bringeth  them  in. 

The  same  day  appoyntis  the  colector  to  pay  out  twentie  merks  to  help 
to  put  vmqll  Alex""  Woodis  sone  to  ane  craft. 

Vigesimo  tertio  Martij  1657. 

The  same  day  the  dekin  conv-einar  with  Baillie  Hall  and  the  dekins  of 
craftis  and  ye  brethrein  of  counsall  being  conveinit  quha  for  the  most  pairt 
war  present  it  is  concludit  and  condischendit  in  regaird  of  the  maiter  moveit 
against  the  craftsmen  in  Gorbalhs  be  the  haill  traidis  within  this  burghe  that 
the  corhoune  chargeis  yrof  be  borne  be  the  haill  treadis  according  to  thair 
power  and  abilitie  and  y*  all  thingis  to  be  done  yrin  be  regulat  be  the  dekin 
conveinar  Baillie  Hall  the  dekins  of  haiiiermen  tailzouris  and  be  William 
Neilsoune  Manasses  Lyill  and  Thomas  Campbell  and  they  to  be  soil  regulatoris 
j'rof. 

Vndecimo  Aprilis  1657. 
The  said  day  William  Park  sone  laiill  to  the  deceist  Johne  Park  in  Blach- 
aime  is  bookit  prenteis  with  James  Simsoune  cordoner  for  the  space  of  fyve 
zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour 
daitit  the  aughtein  day  of  November  last. 


i657l        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  343 

Vigesimo  qitinto  ApHlis  1657. 
The  said  dav   Tohne  Campbell  sone  laull    to  vmqll  Alex^  Campbell  of  ■^rentfi? 

'  .  ,  ■    ,       1        •        ii  Campbell. 

Kemand  is  bookit  prenteis  with  Johne  Reid  youngar  wright  dureing  the  space 
of  seavin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  for  meit  and  he  conforme  to  the 
indentour  daitit  the  seavintein  day  of  Janwarij  1656. 

Vndccimo  Maij  1657. 
The  qlk  day  the  dekin  conveinar  dekins  of  crafts  and  yr  brethrein  of  Maissounsand 

wriETiitis 

counsall  being  con\'einit  wha  for  the  maist  pairt  war  present  it  is  concluded 
that  the  dekin  conveinar  and  dekins  on  counsall  concur  with  the  dekins  of 
maissounis  and  wrightis  anent  the  petitioune  to  be  preterit  be  them  to  the 
provest  bailzeis  and  counsall  for  restraining  of  forrineris  of  thes  tredis  and 
restoring  of  the  friemen  of  the  samyn  tredis  within  burghe  to  thair  wonted 
liberties. 

The  said  day  compeirit  Simon  Pittersgill  clothier  and  acnoledgit  himself  PittersgUi. 
to  be  a  member  with  the  rest  of  the  craftis  within  this  burghe  and  becume 
actit  of  his  awine  frie  will  to  pay  zeirlie  for  the  weill  of  the  poore  in  the  hospitall 
twentie  merkis  proportionalUe  at  the  four  vswall  termes  and  hes  payit  now 
presentlie  to  the  colector  for  Beltane  last  fyve  merks. 

The  same  day  David  Gray  maltman  sumtyme  ane  of  the  ofhciars  of  this  Gray  in  the 
burghe  is  admittit  to  be  ane  of  the  sex  poore  men  in  the  hospitall  and  ordainis    °^P'  ^ 
the  coUecto''  to  pay  him  his  dewis  as  to  the  rest  and  to  begine  as  at  Beltane  last. 

The  same  day  appoynts  Manasses  Lyill  Thomas  Campbell  the  dekins  of  Coiquhoune. 
hafhermen  and  tailzouris  as  alse  James  Duncane  to  meit  w'  WiUiame  Coi- 
quhoune Patrick  Br>xe  and  Niniane  Andirsoune  to  fitt  compts  anent  the 
GorbaUis. 

The  sd  day  in  anser  to  the  complaint  given  in  be  Robert  Marschell  dekin  Gemmill. 
of  coupers  against  Johne  Gemill  his  officiar  the  samyne  being  tryit  and 
examined  be  the  sd  dekin  conveinar  dekins  of  craftis  and  yr  counsall  the  sd 
Johne  Gemill  is  decernit  to  pay  ten  merkis  for  the  vse  of  the  poore  in  place  of 
the  fyve  pundis  he  is  decernit  to  pay  be  his  cahing  for  his  misdemaner  to  the 
dekin  and  if  ever  he  be  fund  to  disobey  or  misbehave  himself  to  his  dekin  as 
he  hes  done  heirtofoir  during  the  tyme  of  his  ofhce  as  officiar  he  is  decernit 
never  to  have  any  libertie  in  the  caling  heirefter  and  in  the  meintyme  he  is 
ordainit  to  pas  to  ward  whill  he  pay  the  sd  ten  merks. 

Vigesimo  primo  Maij  1657. 
The  sd  day  David  Scott  sone  laull  to  WilUame  Scott  travellour  is  bookit  Prenteis  Scott. 
prenteis  with  Johne  Millar  skinner  burges  of  this  burghe  dureing  the  space 
of  seavin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  yrefter  for  meit  and  fie  conforme 
to  the  indento^'s  daitit  the  24  day  of  Febrwarij  last. 


344 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW 


[1657 


Quarto  Junij  1657. 

Prenteis  Scott.  The  same  day  Williame  Scott  sone  lauU  to  Robert  Scott  in  New  Myline 

of  Daldouie  is  bookit  prenteice  w*  Johne  Scott  wright  burges  of  this  burghe 
dureing  the  space  of  seavin  zeiris  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeiris  yrefter  for  meit 
and  fie  conforme  to  the  indento''s  of  the  dait  of  thir  pnts. 


Poore. 


Tackes 
Gorball  land. 


Prenteis 
M'Clane. 


Clark. 


Decimo  tertio  Junij  1657. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacon  conveiner  with  the  deacones  of  craftis  being  all 
conveined  except  the  deacone  of  skiners  it  is  condescendid  be  them  all 
wnanimouslie  y'  ilk  craft  should  susteine  its  auin  poore. 

The  sam  day  it  is  also  condescendid  wnanimouslie  and  agreit  that  the 
deacon  conveiner  be  himselfe  in  name  of  the  haill  deacones  shall  subscryve 
the  tackes  of  thes  landes  in  Gorballes  belonging  to  the  craftis  of  this  brughe 
con'Orm  to  thair  divisioune  with  the  tackes  men  of  the  samyne  quhilks  ar 
heir  allowed  ratified  and  approvin  as  if  the  said  deacon  conveiner  with  the 
haill  deacones  of  craftis  and  thair  bretherine  of  counsell  had  sub'  the  samyne 
themsellves. 

19  Junij  1657. 

The  said  day  Duncane  iFClane  is  booked  prenteis  and  servand  with 
Wilham  Dobie  younger  weaver  during  the  space  of  seavin  zeiris  conform  to 
the  indentour  of  the  dait  of  thir  presentis. 

Sexto  Augustj  1657. 

The  qlk  day  Waltir  Neilsoune  deacone  con\-einer  with  Manasses  Lyell 
lait  baillie  and  with  them  Ale.x''  Jaffra  deacone  of  hamermen  Robert  Caruthers 
deacone  of  tailzoures  Walter  M^^Calla  deacon  of  cordoneres  John  Buchannane 
deacone  of  ba.\ters  James  Thomsoune  deacone  of  chirurgianes  George  Broome 
deacon  of  fleshoures  \\'ilham  Boyd  deacone  of  maissones  John  Otterbume 
deacon  of  wrightes  Ro'  Marshill  deacon  of  cowpers  and  James  Dougall  for  the 
gardners  being  all  conveinit  in  the  craftis  hospitall  of  this  brughe  anent  ane 
complent  given  in  be  George  Clerk  lait  deacone  of  skinners  against  James 
Pade  present  deacone  of  skinners  and  John  Caldwall  and  wthers  bretherine 
of  that  caUing  for  y'  at  Michaellmes  last  was  the  complinar  for  the  tyme  being 
deacon  and  having  sent  the  craftis  box  wp  to  the  hospitall  the  day  of  the  last 
electioune  of  the  deacones  at  Michaellmes  last  the  said  defenderis  and  wthers 
with  them  oppined  the  craftis  bo.x  and  did  thairwith  as  they  pleased  qlk  they 
aught  not  to  have  done  wnles  the  deacon  himselfe  had  beine  present  qlk 
mater  being  tryed  and  examinat  be  the  said  deacon  conveiner  deacones  of 
craftis  and  wtheris  abovenamit  and  they  finding  the  said  James  Padie  and 
John  Caldwall  to  have  bein  then  boxmasters  and  had  charg  of  keiping  the  kj-es 


1657]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  345 

of  the  saides  craftis  box  had  oppined  the  samyne  at  thair  auine  hand  the 
deacon  not  being  present  and  also  Andrew  Love  and  Wilham  Govane  twa  of 
the  bretherin  of  that  calhng  being  also  present  with  them  at  that  instant 
tynie  qlk  they  could  not  denay  and  was  also  deponed  and  affirmed  to  be  trew 
be  Gabriell  Cunyngham  thair  offtciar  in  presence  of  the  haill  said  four 
defendaris  against  the  qlk  depositioune  and  affirmatioune  they  could  say  nor 
aledge  nothing  he  being  with  consent  of  the  saids  defendaris  admitted  as  sole 
witness  in  the  cause  and  seing  they  all  grantid  that  thair  ar  four  bandis 
amissing  belonging  to  the  said  calling  and  poore  thairof  it  was  declaired  be 
the  said  deacon  conveiner  and  deacones  of  craftis  and  wthers  abovespeit  that 
wnles  thes  four  defendaris  abovenamit  find  out  others  wha  hes  takine  away 
the  saides  four  bandis  they  themselves  cannot  eschew  to  be  holdin  doers 
thairof  becaus  it  is  cleirlie  provine  and  confessed  be  them  that  they  hade 
oppined  the  saides  craftis  box  in  maner  abovespeit  qlk  they  aught  not  to 
heave  done  wnles  the  sd  George  Clark  who  was  deacon  for  the  tym  had  beine 
present  and  thairfor  it  is  heirby  enacted  statut  and  ordainit  be  the  said  deacon 
conveiner  deacones  of  craftis  and  wthers  above  mentionat  that  nane  of  the 
saides  persones  (viz)  James  Padie  John  Caldwell  Androw  Love  and  William 
Govane  be  fund  capable  be  the  rest  of  the  bretherine  of  that  calling  to  bear 
ony  office  or  charge  yrintill  whyll  thes  bandes  qhilk  ar  amissing  be  gotin  againe 
and  that  they  give  also  satisfactioune  to  the  place  for  the  said  wrange  and  in 
the  mean  tyme  wnlawes  ilk  ane  of  them  in  fyve  dolloures  to  be  applyed  for  the 
wse  of  the  poore  and  continowes  thair  farder  censoure  anent  the  wpmacking 
of  the  saides  four  bands  quhyll  farder  advyce. 

Undecimo  August]  1657. 

The  qlk  day  Waltir  Neilsoune  deacon  conveiner  Manasses  Lyell  lait  Decreit 
bailhe  Robert  Caruthers  deacon  of  tailzours  Walter  M'^Calla  deacon  of  cordoners  and  Govaue! 
John  Buchannane  deacon  of  baxters  Patrik  Bryce  visitour  of  maltmen  John 
Falcouner  deacone  of  wiveres  George  Broome  deacon  of  fleschoures  Robert 
Marschell  deacon  of  coupers  James  Thomsoune  deacon  of  chirurgianes  John 
Otterbume  deacon  of  wrightes  and  Androw  Jape  deacon  of  bonnetmackers 
being  all  conveined  within  the  cessioune  house  of  the  laigh  kirk  in  the  Tron- 
gait  of  this  brughe  anent  the  bill  and  complent  persewit  at  the  instance  of 
Georg  Clerk  skinner  burges  of  Glasgow  and  lait  deacone  of  the  said  calling 
against  James  Padie  present  deacon  of  the  said  trad  and  William  Govane 
skinner  ane  of  the  bretherine  thairof  bearing  y'  q''  laitlie  the  said  defenders 
and  wtheris  being  censoured  be  the  said  deacon  conveiner  and  deacones  of 
craftis  for  oppining  of  the  saides  craftis  box  at  Michaelmes  last  the  said  com- 
plinar  being  then  deacon  for  the  tyme  quhilk  aught  not  to  have  bein  done 
wnles  he  had  bein  present  as  also  censourit  anent  sum  bandis  belonging  to 
the  said  calhng  and  poore  thairof  qlks  ar  amissing  qlks  maters  wer  all  cleirit 


346  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.         [1657 

of  befor  in  judgment  the  last  weik  zit  it  is  of  veritie  that  sinsyne  the  saids 
James  Padie  in  presence  of  diverse  of  the  saides  deacones  of  craftis  lies  most 
impudenthe  and  falsUe  calumniat  the  said  complinar  in  avouing  that  he  had 
oppined  the  box  himselfe  and  so  was  the  tacker  away  of  all  the  bandis  that 
was  amissing  and  that  the  sd  W'"  Govan  cam  in  wpon  him  q"  he  was  so  doing 
and  fand  him  with  the  box  oppine  looking  out  papers  and  in  lyk  maner  the 
abovenamit  William  Go\'ane  the  wther  of  the  saides  defendaris  did  vent 
himselfe  in  diverse  places  befor  divers  witness  after  the  sam  maner  and  in  so 
doing  the  saides  defenderis  hes  done  in  qt  them  lyes  to  berive  the  said  com- 
pleiner  of  his  honest  name  and  to  bring  him  in  disgrace  comtempt  and  infamie 
and  thairfor  the  saides  defenderis  aught  ather  to  mack  out  q'  thej'  have  aledgit 
against  the  said  complenar  or  els  aught  to  be  censourit  as  fals  calumniatoures 
as  the  said  bill  of  complent  mair  fuUie  proportis  qlk  being  callit  the  said  com- 
pleinai"  and  defendaris  compeirand  all  personaUie  the  saides  defendaris  denayed 
the  said  complent  simphciterlie  and  the  said  compleinar  having  narait  above 
sex  of  the  saides  deacones  of  craftis  to  be  wsit  as  witness  against  the  said 
James  Padie  ane  of  the  defendaris  in  y'  mater  and  they  pnt  being  suorne  did 
all  verifie  and  prove  in  his  awin  presence  that  pairt  of  the  complent  above- 
wryttine  in  sua  far  as  concernes  the  sd  James  Padie  and  for  proving  aganest 
the  sd  W""  Govane  the  wther  of  the  sds  defendaris  the  abovenamit  George 
Clark  complinar  producit  twa  famous  witness  quha  being  suorne  deponed 
that  they  hard  the  said  William  Govane  say  that  he  cam  in  wpon  the  sd  George 
Clark  in  his  aune  house  and  had  the  box  oppine  befor  him  looking  out  papers 
(qhilk  was  not  fair)  and  thairefter  the  said  complinar  and  defendaris  being  all 
removit  the  said  deacon  conveiner  deacones  of  craftis  and  wthers  abovenamit 
having  weill  weighted  and  pondred  the  said  matter  and  finding  the  said  com- 
plent sufhcienthe  proven  they  be  this  thair  decreit  and  sentance  decernis  ilk 
ane  of  the  saids  defenders  to  pay  ane  wTilaw  of  ten  doUoures  to  be  applied  for 
the  wse  of  the  poore  and  to  remaine  in  ward  till  that  be  done  and  the  said 
deacon  conveinar  to  siek  warrand  of  ane  of  the  bailleis  for  y'  effect  and  ordaines 
the  saids  defenders  to  give  satisfactioune  to  the  sd  compleinar  for  the  forsaid 
wranging  of  him  be  sight  of  the  deacon  conveiner  deacones  of  craftis  and 
wthers  abovewryttine. 

Vltimo  Angiistj  1657. 

Conveinit  the  deacon  conveinar  Manasses  Lyll  and  W"'  Neilsoune 
and  withe  them  the  deacones  of  hamermen  tailzoures  cordonores 
weifers  skinners  maissones  wrights  chirurgianes  baxters  bonnet- 
maicers  fleshoures  coupers  visitour  of  maltmen  as  also  James 
Dougall  gairner  Johne  Miller  tailzour  James  Duncane  Johne  Scot 
Michael  Watsoune  George  Clark  Daniell  Broune  W"i  Craig  Gabriell 
Cumyng  Alexander  Holmes  all  brethrein  of  the  deaconveinares 
counsall. 


1657]         RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  347 

The  said  [day]  the  twa  decreites  given  out  and  pronuncit  against  James  Ratificatiouae 
Padie  W"'"  Govane  and  wy^s  wpon  the  sext  and  ahvinth  dayes  of  August  decreites. 
instant  being  publictlie  red  war  ratified  and  approvin  be  the  forsaides  haill 
persounes  as  laulhe  and  trewhe  sett  doune  according  to  the  probatioune  led 
and  y'  determinatioune  yi'intill  and  give  it  happin  the  said  James  Padie  and 
wyi's  to  oppung  the  saides  decreites  heirefter  ordaines  the  samyne  to  be 
defendit  wpon  the  publict  charges  to  the  vvtermost. 

The  same  day  in  respect  of  the  bad  miscarieg  of  (  )  Nasmith  and 

Naysmith  and  Johne  Currie  twa  of  the  poore  men  in  the  hospitall  they  ar     "'^'^' 
suspendit  and  ordainit  to  remove  out  y^oi  and  not  to  be  readmittit  againe 
y''in  quhill  they  give  better  testimonie  of  thair  good  cariadg. 

The  same  day  James  Padie  skinner  did  friehe  quyt  (  )  Reid  Reid. 

his  servand  so  y'  he  may  frilie  sarve  any  wy""  honest  men  of  the  calhng  during 
the  zeires  of  his  prenteiship  zit  to  rune  and  y''efter  he  is  to  have  his  hbertie 
of  the  toune  and  craft  as  ane  prenteis  bot  if  he  and  his  maister  can  zit  agrie 
this  act  is  to  be  null. 

Vigesiino  tertio  Novembris  1657. 
The  said  day  the  deaconveiner  the  deacones  of  craftes  and  thair  bretherine 
of  counsell  being  conveinit  Niniane  Andersoune  lait  coUecto"'  maid  compt  of 
his  haill  intromissioune  and  debursmentes  of  the  hospitalles  goodes  this  last 
zeir  q^oi  charge  and  discharge  is  as  fallowes  and  first  the 

Charge. 
In  the  first  the  compter  charges  himselfe  with  the  sowme  that  was  Compt 

restand  in  his  hands  at  the  making  of  his  last  compt  extending  to     5376 
Item  receavit  be  him  fra  WilUam  Reid  of  the  few  dewties  con- 

teined  in  the  rentall  .  .  .  .  .       56     4     4 

Item  receavit  from  the  visitour  of  maltmen  the  lait  deacones  of 

tailzoures  wrightes  and   the  deacone  of   chirurgianes  in  lew 

of  thair  swordes  fra  ilk  ane  of  them  viij  li     inde       .  .       32     o     o 

Item  receavit  fra  the  deacon  conveinar  for  sume  old  stanchours 

and  sume  lyme         .  .  .  .  .  .400 

Item  receavit  fra  James  Bell  that  he  was  awand  be  his  tickit  .  100  o  o 
Item  receavit  fra  Alex""  Colquhoune  maltman  for  ane  p'  of  his 

gildrie  fyne  ......     100    o    o 

Item  receavit  fra  Johne  Hall  baillie  in  name  of  the  exers  of  wmq'i 

Johne  Neill  qlk  he  was  awand  be  band  to  the  hous    .  .     105  10     o 

Item  receavit  fra  Johne  Colquhoune  for  the  ahwall  of  1000  merkes 

fra  Mertimes  1655  to  Mertimes  1656  .  .  .       40     o     o 

Item  receavit  fra  \\"iUiame  Coats  for  the  afiwall  of  500  merkes  .  20  o  o 
Item  receavit  fra  the  rehct  of  wmqll  George  Lyone  for  the  aii 

rent  of  300  li  fra  Candilmes  1656  to  Candilmes  1657  .       iS    o    o 


.•\ndersone. 


348 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


Compt 
Andersoae. 


Item  receavit  fra  the  threttine  deacones  of  q^ter  comptes 
Item  receavit  fra  the  htsters       .... 
Item  receavit  from  the  gardners 
Item  recea\-it  from  Simon  Pittersgill 


[1657 

202     6     8 

6  13  4 
368 
368 


3 

4 

0 

.  no 

7 

8 

•   39 

14 

6 

22 

0 

0 

■   13 
d 

13 

0 

s 

.  166 

13 

4 

II 

I 

8 

•   47 

6 

6 

.   24 

6 

0 

e  211 

13 

4 

.  125 

0 

0 

Followes  the  compt  of  the  Gorball  rentes  receavit  be  the  comptar  fra  tlie 
personcs  following  for  the  crope  1656. 
In  the  first  fra  Archbald  Bar  in  the  muir     inde 
Mair  fra  John  Maxwell 
Item  from  James  Cumyng 
Item  from  William  Murdoch 
Mair  from  James  Muir 

Item  from  WiUiam  Corbett  250  merkes  and  it  is  to  be  remembred 
that  he  hes  payed  mor  nor  his  dew  as  the  collector  sayes 
about  60  ll.     I  say  receavit 
Item  from  James  Scot     . 
Item  from  George  Murdoch 
Item  from  James  Andersoune 

Item  receavit  from  Patrick  Bryce  for  the  tynd  of  that  same  crope 
Mair  receavit  for  the  tyndes  of  the  crope  1657 
SuiTia  of  the  haill  charge  is 

ane  thousand  fyve  hundred  nynteine  pundes  fyftein  shillinges 
twa  penneis. 

Followes  the  discharge. 

Imprimis  deburst  to  the  sex  men  in  the  hous     inde 

Mair  for  ane  winding  sheit  and  ane  kist  to  wmqll  Robert  Scot 

Mair  for  cloth  to  be  serkes  35  ells  at  8s.  the  ell     inde 

Mair  for  5  pair  of  shoone  at  36s.  the  pair     inde    . 

Item  for  ane  pair  of  sheites  to  James  Bishope 

Mair  for  nyne  ell  of  cloth  ane  q''ter  to  be  twa  cloukes  to  James 
Bishope  and  Walter  Nilsoune 

Mair  for  making  of  them 

Item  deburst  for  coalles  the  said  zeir 

Item  to  the  pensiouneres  viz  to  Jo°  Fultoune  elder  skinner  James 
Oglevie  tailzo"^  the  relict  of  Hendrie  Marshell  and  to  on  Margrat 
Davidsoune  9  ll  12s.  ilk  moneth  the  moneth  of  November 
and  December  1657  [?  1656]  Januar  Feb""  March  Apr^dl  Maij 
Junij  Julij  August  September  October  in  ano  1657  zeires 
instant    extending    to  ....  . 

Item  to  wTiiqll  Thomas  Andersounes  rehct  at  comand  of  the  deacon 

conveinar     inde         .  .  .  .  .  .3 

Item  deburst  to  diverse  and  sundrie  poore  at  Candilmes  1657  ^or 

thair  supplie  .  .  .  .  .  •       Z7 


.     288  0 

0 

t    5  16 

8 

14  0 

0 

9  0 

0 

2  13 

4 

.   17  II 

6 

I  6 

8 

■   14  17 

0 

115    4 


1657]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


349 


Item  to  the  relict  of  wmqll  Gabriell  Cunynghame  wpon  discharge 

Mair  for  ane  harle  to  the  hous       .... 

Item  to  W""  Braidie       ..... 

Item  to  his  man  ..... 

Mair  lent  to  James  Duncan  to  mak  \vp  ane  thousand  merkes  for 
the  qlk  the  securitie  is  lying  in  the  box 

Item  to  William  Reid      ..... 

Mair  to  the  colleg  collecto''  for  ane  bursour 

Item  to  the  dark  for  his  fie         . 

Mair  for  releife  of  M''  Alex^  Sinkar  be  ane  warrand 

Item  for  leiding  home  of  sume  old  timber  from  the  hie  kirk 

Mair  for  mending  of  the  stair      .... 

Mair  to  William  Boyd  for  mending  the  lumheid    . 

Mair  to  William  Reid  for  lym      .... 

Mair  to  William  Reid  for  measouring  sum  landes  in  the  Gorballes 

Item  deburst  be  him  with  the  deacon  conveinar  and  sundrie  of 
deacones  of  craftes  and  wy''es  with  him  that  was  spent  with 
the  deacon  conveinar  of  Ed"'  and  wy''es  with  him  the  tyme 
of  the  conventioune  of  borrowes  at  severall  tymes    . 


8  10  o 

0  10  o 
20  o  0 

1  16  0 


333     6 

4     o 

66  13 

20     0 

4  16 

2  0 

5  6 
14    3 

5     8 

3  12 


20     o 


Followes  the  sowines  debiirsit  be  the  comptar  to  severall  deacones  for  the 

Gorhall  rent  1655. 
Item  in  the  first  to  the  maltmen 
Mair  to  the  weavers 
Mair  to  the  hafhermen 
Mair  to  the  wrightes 
Mair  to  the  cowpers 
Mair  to  the  tailzoi'es 
Item  to  the  cordoners 
Item  to  the  skinners 
Mair  to  the  baxters 
Mair  to  the  fleshoures 
Mair  to  the  maissounes 
Item  the  compter  aught  to  be  dischargit  of  the  sowme  following 

as  being  his  fiell  allowed  to  him  for  collecting  the  rentes  of 

the  Gorballs  the  space  of  twa  zeires     inde    . 
Item  mair  deburst  be  the  compter  to  the  poore  men  in  the  house 

for  this  last  halfe  q'itv         ..... 
Item  deburst  to  the  four  ordinarie  pensioners  for   this  instant 

moneth  of  November  1657  .... 

Summa  of  the  discharg  is 

ane  thousand    fyve   hundreth   threscoir    thretteine    pundes 
aught  shilling  ten  penneis. 


127  0 

0 

21   3 

4 

42  6 

8 

21  3 

4 

21  3 

4 

127  0 

0 

42  6 

8 

42  6 

8 

10  II 

8 

•   21  3 

4 

10  II 

8 

33     6     8 


o     o 


9  12 


350 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1657 


Sua  charge  and  discharge  being  compairit  it  is  fund  that  the 
compter  is  superexpendit  the  sowme  of  fyftie  four  punds  thrie 
shiUinges  four  penneis  qlk  is  ordained  to  be  payit  in  be  the  collecto'' 
as  also  four  pundes  xviij  s.  of  ill  money  which  he  had  receavit  and 
was  taine  of  his  handes. 


Ker  collecto'  The  same  day  be  pluralitie  of  votes  Johne  Ker  is  elected  collecto''  for  ane 

zeir  to  cum  quha  being  pnt  did  accept  and  give  his  oath  as  wse  is. 


Money 
producit. 


Bands 
producit. 


Warrand. 


Warrand. 


Band 
collecto'. 


Bischope. 


Selkrige. 


Jap. 


The  same  day  the  said  Johne  Ker  producit  on  the  table  the  sowme  of 
fourtie  fyve  pundes  seavintein  shilhng  aught  penneis  and  W™  Reid  producit  of 
the  money  contained  in  the  rentall  fyftie  and  seavine  pundes  and  the  forsaid  ill 
money  given  in  be  the  forsd  Ninian  Andersoune  being  rowpit  thair  was  given 
thairfor  thrie  pund  ten  shilhng  qlk  haill  moneys  was  given  to  the  said  Johne 
Ker  quha  is  to  be  chargit  y^w*. 

The  same  day  the  abovenamit  Ninian  Andersoune  producit  the  bands 
following  viz  Archbald  Maissoune  150  tl  wmqll  George  Lyones  300 11  and 
Robert  Huntares  regrat  band  qlkes  wer  all  put  in  the  box. 

The  said  day  ordaines  the  collecto""  to  pay  to  Androw  Gibsoune  the  sowme 
of  xiij  ll  viij  s.  as  being  the  half  for  the  pryce  of  the  oylles  furnished  for  Archbald 
Bishopes  lege. 

The  said  day  appoyntes  the  collecto''  to  pay  bak  to  Manasses  Lyll  and 
Johne  Miller  tailzour  the  sowme  of  twentie  ane  pundis  as  being  the  halfe  of 
fourtie  twa  pundes  formerly  given  in  be  them  to  the  hous  that  was  gottin 
[from]  ane  Dutchman  quhairof  the  halfe  belonged  to  the  merchandes  poore 
and  that  the  deane  of  gild  had  gottine  ane  decreit  against  them  thairwpon 
and  charged  y""  w*  Ires  of  horning  y''for. 

The  same  day  the  band  grantit  formerly  be  wmqll  James  StirUng  is  given 
to  the  collecto''  to  put  to  executioune. 

The  said  day  be  pluraHtie  of  votes  it  is  concludit  and  ordainit  that  q'  is 
to  the  foir  of  the  ten  doUers  that  was  formerly  tackin  as  ane  wnlaw  from 
William  Govane  be  all  bestowed  wpon  the  cuiring  of  Archbald  Bischope 
his  leg. 

The  said  day  the  collecto''  is  ordained  to  buy  cloth  to  be  ane  stand  of 
clothes  to  James  Selkrigs  broy""  sone  according  to  the  promis  maid  formerly 
y''anent. 

WUimo  Decetnbris  1657. 
Ordaines  the  collecto''  to  pay  to  James  Jap  for  his  supplie  twentie  markes. 


1658]         RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  351 

Duodecimo  Fehruarij  1658. 
Ordaines  James  Wadrop  Johne  Miller  tailzeo""  Johne  Ker  tailzeor  and  Gorbaii 
Patrick  Bryce  visito''  to  call  Niniane  Andersoune  to  ane  compt  anent  the 
Gorball  rentes  1656  and  preceiding  axid  Manassas  Lyll  to  be  with  them  and 
Johne  Miller  to  con  vein  them. 

The  said  day  ordaines  the  collecto''  to  pay  out  to    put  wmq"    Eliesar  Hammiltoune 
Hamiltounes  sone  to  ane  craft  twentie  markes  and  to  pay  out  to  help  to  put  their  sones 
wmq"  Johne  Miller  his  sone  to  ane  craft  twentie  pundes.  prenteiss. 

This  day  it  is  declaired  be  the  deacon  conveinar  and  deacones  of  crafts  Andersoune. 
that  James  Andersoune  couper  may  tak  Johne  Zounges  sone  to  be  ane  prenteis 
becaus  he  is  ane  friemanes  sone  notwithstanding  he  hes  ane  prenteis  alredie 
hot  that  he  may  not  tak  ane  wther  prenteis  quhill  the  tyme  of  the  prentes  he 
hes  allredie  be  rune  out  but  that  the  sd  Johne  Zounges  sone  sail  be  no  prejudice 
to  him. 

Tertio  Marcij  1658. 

The  quhilk  day  Walter  Neilsoune  lait  deacon  convener  being  new  electit  Lytt  deacon 
bailHe  the  deacones  of  craftes  and  thair  counsell  quha  for  the  maist  pairt  wer  '=°"'^'"^''- 
pnt  for  electing  thrie  of  the  number  to  be  presentit  to  the  magistrates  and 
counsall  this  day  that  ane  of  y™  might  be  electit  deacon  conveinar  to  the  next 
laull  electione  be  plurahtie  of  votes  William  Neilsoune  Manasses  Lj'll  and 
Thomas  Campbell  was  electit  to  the  effect  forsaid. 

Conforme  q''wnto  the  said  Manasses  Lyll  was  electit  deacon  conveinar.       Lyll  dicon 

cyveinar. 

Sexto  Marcij  1658. 

The  said  day  Walter  Neilsoune  now  present  baillie  and  lait  deaconveinar  Four  men  to 
being  with  the  rest  of  the  deacones  of  the  craftes  and  their  counsall  (quha  grids^coun°seii. 
for  the  most  pairt  wer  pnt)  conveined  for  electing  four  of  their  nuber  to  be 
on  the  deane  of  gildes  counsall  to  the  nixt  election  they  did  all  in  ane  voyce 
agrie  to  conteinow  thrie  of  the  four  that  was  on  last  to  wit  William  Nilsoun 
Johne  Miller  and  Johne  Ker  and  be  pluralitie  of  voittes  Robert  Caruthers 
tailzeo''  was  choysen  to  be  the  fourth  man. 

Glasgow  Vltimo  Marcij  1658. 

Conveined  Walter  Neilsoune  present  baillie  and  lait  deacon 
conveinar  of  the  said  burgh  and  \\ith  him  Manasses  Lyll  W™ 
Neilsoune  the  deacones  of  hairierman  tailzeo''es  skinners  meassones 
cowpers  weavers  wrightes  and  baxters. 

The  same  day  ordaines  the  complent  maid  be  the  hamermen  and  wrightes  Compient 
againes  Robert  Sanders  to  be  remonstrat  to  the  towne  counsall.  hammermen 


352 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1658 


Bischop. 


Sailleors. 


Wairand. 


Wrightes. 


Wallace. 


Venter  salt. 


The  same  day  appoyntes  Archbald  Bischop  to  be  interteaned  in  the 
hospitall  so  long  as  he  is  wnder  cuir  with  James  Frank  docto''  for  recovering 
of  his  leg  wpon  the  sd  hospitalles  awine  charges. 

Glasgow  Vtgesimo  Maij  1658. 
The  same  day  the  haill  deacones  new  and  old  quha  for  the  maist  pairt 
wer  pnt  (  ). 

The  said  day  it  is  condescendit  that  all  craftismen  quha  ar  to  enter  gild 
brether  wpon  payment  of  the  greatest  fynes  that  they  gett  trust  y^oi  to  Mer- 
times  nLxt  or  Witsondaj'. 

The  same  day  it  is  aggried  wpon  that  the  saillers  be  takine  in  with  the 
rest  of  the  members  of  the  hous. 

The  same  day  ordained  the  collecto''  to  pay  to  Michaell  Watsoune  quhat 
he  hes  debursed  for  intertaining  of  Archbald  Bischop  in  the  hospitall  extending 
to  aught  pundes  fyftine  shillinges. 

Glasgow  Vigesimo  iiotio  Maij  165S. 
The  same  day  Baillie  Neilsoune  Manasses  Lyll  the  deacones  of  hamermen 
weavers  chirurgianes  skinners  coupers  bonnetmackers  the  visito''  of  maltmen 
as  also  Alex''  Jafra  Robert  Caruthers  and  Robert  jMarschell  lait  deacones  and 
sundrie  wther  of  that  number  being  conveined  and  tacking  to  their  considera'un 
that  notwithstanding  of  that  meiting  they  have  had  heirtofoir  with  the  deacon 
of  WTightes  and  sundrie  of  the  brethrine  of  that  calling  anent  the  composing 
of  the  difierrence  amongest  them  in  the  mater  relaiting  to  Harie  Ore  and  hes 
zit  nothing  prevailed  they  therfor  heirby  ordaine  the  deacone  of  wrightes 
and  haill  bretherine  of  that  calling  to  send  for  and  liberat  the  said  Harie  Ore 
out  of  the  tolbuith  of  Stirling  q^'in  they  have  incarcerat  him  and  to  bring  him 
trie  home  againe  on  their  awine  proper  charges  and  he  is  to  be  frie  of  all  expenss 
theirby  becaus  thej'  caused  him  to  be  transported  thither  not  craving  the 
advyce  nether  of  deacon  conveinar  nor  deacones  and  ordaines  them  to  give 
ane  positive  answer  this  day  heirto  betuixt  and  ten  houres  or  then  to  sie  to 
themselfes  in  aU  their  maters  for  the  saides  haille  deacones  and  wthers  foir- 
saides  and  all  quhom  they  doe  represent  wold  disawin  them  in  all  their  maters 
and  adoes. 

The  same  day  ordaines  the  coUecto''  to  give  to  Johne  Wallace  for  his 
supplie  fyve  rex  dolloures. 

Glasgow  Decimo  octavo  Jiinij  1658. 
The  same  day  Baillie  Neilsoune  Manasses  Lyll  and  the  maist  pairt  of  the 
haill  deacones  and  bretherine  of  their  counsall  being  conveined  it  is  wnani- 
moushe  condiscendit  that  they  sail  tack  y''  pairt  of  the  ventar  of  salt  offered 


1658]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  353 

and  that  the  collecto"'  give  band  to  Alex''  Cumyng  for  pay'  of  the  excys  y^of 
and  the  hous  to  be  bund  for  his  releif  and  the  salt  to  be  sellared  downe  the 
water  and  comissionat  Niniane  Andersoune  and  Johne  Watsoune  sailer  to 
goe  downe  and  receave  the  samyne  at  the  schip  syd  and  the  dark  to  subscryve 
ane  comissioune  for  that  effect. 

The  same  day  their  is  given  out  of  the  box  to  the  collecto'"  ane  band  of  CoUecto'. 
ane  hundreth  and  fyftie  pundes  grantit  be  Archbald  Maissoune  to  this  hous 
for  his  gildrie  q^w'  the  collecto''  is  to  be  chargit  with  at  his  compt  macking. 


Pittersgill. 


Vigesimo  scxlo  Jiilij  1658  yeares. 

The  said  day  Thomas  Pittirsgill  sone  laiill  to  Thomas  Pittersgill  neir  Prenteis 
Rippen  in  Yorkshyre  in  England  is  bund  prenteis  with    Simon  Pittersgill 
clothier  his  vncle  and  that  during  the  space  of  seavine  yeares  conforme  to  the 
indento''  of  the  dait  of  thir  puts  quhais  entrie  was  therto  on  the  first  day  of 
March  1656  \'eares 

Sexto  Septembris  1658. 

The  qlk  day  ther  being  con  veined  in  the  craftis  hospitall  of  the  said  burgh  Decreit  jafra 
Walter  Neilsoune  ane  of  the  present  bailleis  y^ol  and  lait  deacon  conveinar  against7ome 
Manasses  Lvll  laitlie  electit  deacon  conveinar  the  deacones  of  craftis  new  and  of.the  breth- 

erin  or  y' 

old  quha  for  the  most  pairt  wer  put  and  divers  wthers  of  the  deacon  conveners  calling  of 
counsel!  anent  the  bill  of  complent  given  in  befor  them  be  Alexander  Jafra 
lait  deacon  of  hemermen  and  James  Barclay  ane  wther  brother  of  that  caUing 
against  Johne  Burnes  present  deacon  of  hamermen  James  Johnstoune  Robert 
Wilsoune  Johne  Leiper  William  Philpe  Johne  Dunckiesoune  James  Fairie  and 
Gawine  Park  all  bretherin  of  the  sd  vocatioune  and  burgess  of  the  said  burgh 
mackand  mentioune  that  q""  about  thrie  yeares  syne  or  therby  the  saides 
compleaners  and  wther  maisters  of  the  said  craft  for  the  tyme  being  com- 
issionat be  the  haill  bodie  of  the  caUing  for  the  buying  and  mounting  of  twa 
new  mortclothes  for  the  wse  of  the  haill  bretherine  of  the  said  tred  quhilk 
accordinglie  they  faithfullie  went  about  according  to  the  oath  of  God  lying 
wpon  them  nevertheless  it  is  of  veritie  that  the  haill  persounes  abovenamed 
hes  most  wnjusthe  and  shamfuUie  reproched  and  calumnied  the  saidis  com- 
pleaners in  ane  verie  shamfull  maner  of  way  crying  out  publictlie  in  all  ther 
meatings  they  mad  that  their  was  the  worth  of  thrie  scoir  pundes  worth  of  silk 
bought  for  the  wse  of  the  saides  mortclothes  stolline  away  from  them  and 
somtyme  calling  it  and  affirming  ther  was  stoline  away  fyve  sex  or  seavine 
pund  weight  and  this  they  did  vent  to  bring  shame  disgrace  and  comtempt 
wpon  the  saides  compleaners  and  to  bereave  them  of  ther  honest  names  and 
so  to  mak  them  odious  and  detastable  amongst  the  rest  of  the  bretherine  of 
that  calling  and  for  that  effect  did  cans  tear  assunder  the  haill  mortclothes 
and  did  keep  courtes  wpon  the  said  compleaners  as  if  all  had  bein  trew  as  was 

Y 


354  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1658 

alledgit  be  the  defendantes  abovenamed  albeit  they  wer  dischargit  be  warrand 
of  ye  sd  Manasses  Lyll  in  absence  of  the  sd  Walter  Neilsoune  then  deacon 
conveiner  for  the  tyme  q"  he  returned  from  Ed""  q''  he  was  at  that  present  and 
the  saides  compleaners  for  giveing  obedience  compeared  in  ther  court  q"'  they 
wer  wpbraided  be  them  as  if  they  had  bein  comoune  theifes  and  in  presence 
of  the  said  court  and  divers  wther  tymes  the  said  James  Johnstoune  and  Johne 
Dunkiesoun  did  with  extendit  voyces  cry  out  that  they  wold  give  in  to  the 
craftis  box  fourtie  shilling  starling  and  left  them  tack  ther  advantages  of 
the  said  compleaners  for  ther  thift  and  efter  that  they  had  rent  the  haill 
freinzeis  of  the  sd  mortclothes  and  cutted  the  work  of  thrie  of  the  knops  and 
tryed  the  weight  of  all  in  the  said  James  Jonstounes  trustie  ballance  and 
finding  themselfes  wrang  they  caused  Thomas  Hendersoune  quyetlie  schew 
the  samyne  togither  again  als  weill  as  they  could  and  all  this  was  don  and 
comitted  be  the  saides  defendantes  to  rub  schame  disgrace  and  contempt 
upon  the  sd  compleaners  as  said  is  and  to  mak  them  odious  and  detastable 
in  the  sosietie  of  all  guid  cristians  and  to  bereave  them  of  ther  honest  names 
qlk  is  moir  deare  to  them  nor  ther  lyfes  and  y''for  the  saides  defendares  aught 
ay''  to  mak  guid  q'  they  heave  alledgit  or  then  to  be  holdin  and  reput  as 
malitious  fals  calumniato''es  and  punished  accordinglie,  and  farder  according 
to  the  actes  sett  downe  be  the  deacon  conveinar  and  deacones  of  craftes  of 
befor  for  the  lyk  as  the  said  bill  of  complent  mair  fuUie  proportes  quhilk  being 
calht  the  saids  compleaners  and  defendantes  compearand  all  personalley  in 
judgment  the  saides  Robert  Wilsoune  Johne  Leiper  W">  Philpe  James 
Farie  and  Gawine  Park  fyve  of  the  saides  defendantes  grantit  they  did  consent 
to  tak  the  fasses  aff  the  said  mortclothes  and  no  farder  and  then  they  and  the 
remanent  of  the  Sciides  defendantes  denayed  all  the  rest  of  the  said  bill  of 
complent  and  the  samyn  being  admittit  to  the  sdes  compleaners  ther  proba'une 
and  yi'efter  divers  famous  witness  being  receavit  suorne  and  examinat  y^'wpon 
and  then  the  abovenamed  Walter  Neilsoune  lait  deaconveinar  Manasses  Lyll 
and  the  haill  deacones  of  craftes  new  and  old  present  with  divers  wy^es  of  ther 
counsell  finding  it  sufficiently  provin  be  the  depositiounes  of  saids  famous 
witness  that  it  was  utred  be  some  of  the  sd  defendantes  that  ther  was  stoline 
away  the  worth  of  thrie  scoir  pundes  worth  of  silk  that  was  bought  for  y^  wse 
of  the  saides  mortclothes  and  some  of  them  saying  that  ther  was  four  fyve 
sex  or  seavine  pund  weight  of  it  stollin  away  be  the  saides  compleaners  and 
that  the  saides  James  Johnestoune  and  Johne  Dunkiesoune  had  offered  divers 
tymes  opinly  the  said  fourtie  shilhngs  starling  to  the  craftis  box  to  gett  warrand 
to  persew  the  saides  compleaners  for  their  thift  the  saides  James  Jonstoune 
John  Dunkiesoune  William  Philpe  and  Johne  Leiper  and  ilk  ane  of  them  being 
fund  guiltie  in  calumniating  the  compleaners  therfor  conforme  to  ane  act  sett 
downe  wpon  the  sextine  day  of  October  1655  ar  heirby  declared  as  wncapable 
to  bear  ony  oflke  or  charge  in  ther  calling  or  in  the  deaconveiners  hous  heir- 
efter  wntill  they  give  satisfactioun  for  ther  offence  to  the  hous  and  pairteis 


1658]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  355 

grieved  and  remittes  ther  farder  punishment  to  the  ordinarie  judges  and  q' 
satisfactioune  they  sail  give  to  the  p*ies  wronged  for  the  sds  wronges. 

13  September  1658. 
The  quhilk  day  \\'alter  Neilsoune  ane  of  the  present  bailleis  of  the  said  Bumes  and 
burgh  and  lait  deacon veinar  therof  Manasses  Lyll  laitlie  electit  deacon  con-  "^  eswnawi  . 
veinar  with  the  deacones  of  craftis  new  and  old  quha  for  the  maist  pairt  wer 
present  being  conveined  Johne  Burnes  deacon  of  hamermen  James  Jonstoune 
Johne  Leiper  Robert  Wilsoune  W""  Philp  James  Farie  Johne  Dunckiesoune 
and  Gawine  Park  hamermen  burgess  of  the  samyne  burgh  and  ilk  ane  of  them 
ar  wnlawed  and  decernit  to  pay  to  Johne  Ker  coUecto''  to  the  poor  of  the 
craftis  hospitall  the  sowme  of  fyve  pundes  scotis  money  and  that  for  ane 
disobedience  comitted  be  them  and  ilk  ane  of  them  in  keeping  and  holding 
of  ane  court  and  for  taking  the  fassis  aff  the  craftis  mortclothes  being  dis- 
chargit  in  the  contrarie  be  warrand  of  the  said  Manasses  Lyll  then  lait 
deaconveinar  in  absence  of  the  aforsd  Walter  Neilsoune  deacon  conveinar  for 
ye  tyme  quhilk  non  of  the  sdes  eight  persounes  could  denay  and  therfor  the 
said  baillie  and  the  aforsaid  Manasses  Lyll  with  the  abovenamed  deacones 
new  and  old  wnlawit  and  decernit  as  sd  is  as  also  wnderstanding  that  the 
saides  James  Johnestoune  Johne  Dunckiesoune  Johne  Leiper  and  William 
Philhp  four  of  the  saides  eight  persounes  abovenamed  being  fund  guiltie  m 
calumniating  and  injuring  Alex^  Jafra  somtyme  ther  deacon  and  James  Barclay 
hamerman  contrair  the  actes  sett  downe  against  the  lyk  therfor  and  conforme 
to  ane  act  sett  downe  on  the  nyntine  day  of  November  1655  the  sdes  four 
persounes  ar  dischargit  to  heave  any  voyce  or  consent  in  electing  or  choysing 
the  deacon  of  ther  calhng  in  tyme  coming  or  yit  ony  place  in  the  deacon 
conveiners  meating  as  also  dischargit  the  said  Johne  Bumes  James  Farie 
and  Gawine  Park  to  heave  any  voyce  in  choysing  of  ther  sd  deacon  q" 
they  give  obedience  for  the  said  wronge  and  disobedience  and  farder  they 
ha\'ing  revisit  the  depositiounes  of  the  witness  producit  be  the  said  Alex^ 
Jafra  and  James  Barclay  against  the  sd  Robert  Wilsoune  and  wthers  above- 
named  and  finding  it  clearlie  provin  be  on  of  the  saides  witness  that  the  said 
Robert  did  say  ther  was  sex  or  seavine  punds  of  silk  stoline  that  was  bought 
for  the  wse  of  the  mortclothes  and  that  it  was  also  clearlie  provin  be  that 
same  and  divers  wthers  witness  that  he  ventit  oft  and  publictlie  that  ther  was 
threttin  punds  of  silk  bought  for  the  ws  of  the  mortclothes  quhilk  is  supposed 
be  divers  of  the  deacons  and  wthers  conveined  that  that  speach  hes  bein  the 
grund  of  all  the  calumnies  and  was  uttred  only  to  mak  the  sds  Alexander 
Jafra  and  James  Barcla}'  odious  and  detestable  to  the  rest  of  the  bretherin 
of  ther  calhng  and  therfor  they  dischargit  the  sd  Robert  Wilsoune  from 
having  any  voyce  in  the  electiounes  of  the  deacones  of  ther  craftes  heirefter 
or  yit  ony  place  in  the  deacon  conveiners  meatings.  Therefter  compeared 
the  abovewrj-ttin  Robert  \Mlsoune  for  himselfe  and  in  name  and  behalfe  of 


356 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGO^^■, 


[1658 


the  rest  of  the  persouns  compleaned  upon  be  the  saides  Alexander  Jafra  and 
James  Barclay  and  declared  that  he  and  they  wer  all  most  willing  to  give 
satisfactioun  for  any  wrong  was  done  to  the  saides  compleaners  and  y*  be 
sight  of  theis  conveined  or  be  any  sex  of  them  q™  the  said  Alex''  Jafra  should 
choys  q''wpon  he  for  himselfe  and  in  name  and  behalfe  of  the  rest  of  the  sds 
persones  compleaned  wpon  that  wold  adhear  to  him  askit  instrumentes. 


Reid  in 
hospitall. 


Grier  officiar. 


Warrand. 


Decimo  septimo  Septembris  1658. 

The  said  day  Walter  Neilsoune  lait  deacon  conveinar  with  the  deacones 
of  craftis  wha  for  the  most  pairt  wer  present  Johne  Reid  wright  being  now 
becom  aged  and  pour  be  pluralitie  of  voits  is  admittit  to  be  one  of  the  sex  men 
of  the  hospitall  and  to  gett  his  allowance  as  the  rest  gettes. 

The  same  day  Johne  Grier  ane  of  the  towne  officiares  is  admittit  and 
receavit  to  be  officiar  to  the  deacon  conveinar  as  William  Reid  was  formerlie. 

The  said  day  ordaines  the  collecto''  to  give  to  David  Mitchell  tailj'eo'' 
the  sex  punds  that  Johne  Currie  who  was  last  put  out  of  the  hospitall  should 
now  have  gottin  and  ordaines  him  to  pay  wther  sex  punds  with  it  for  his 
supphe. 

Decimo  nono  Septembris  1658. 

The  quhilk  day  thair  being  conveined  in  the  craftes  hospitall  of  the  said 
burgh  Walter  Neilsowne  last  decon  conviner  (in  respect  Manasses  LyU  who 
was  last  choysen  decon  conveiner  did  not  accept)  togidder  w^ith  Androw 
Mudie  present  baillie  for  the  craftes  of  the  samyne  burgh  AUexander  Jafra 
decon  of  herhermen  Robert  Caruthers  decon  of  tailhoures  Johne  Falcouner 
decon  of  weavers  Johne  Millar  visitor  of  maltmen  Thomas  Lochart  decon  of 
chirurgians  Robert  Broome  decon  of  fleschors  Wilham  Hunter  decon  of 
skinners  Robert  Marschell  decon  of  coupers  Ninian  Spens  deacon  of  bonnet- 
makers  and  with  them  divers  and  sundrie  lait  deacones  of  craftes  with  the 
persones  last  choysen  to  be  on  the  deacon  conveiners  counsell  quha  for  the 
most  pairt  wer  preasent  and  that  for  electing  thrie  of  thair  number  to  be  putt 
on  Ij'tt  and  presentit  this  day  to  the  magistrates  and  counsell  of  this  brugh 
that  ane  of  them  might  be  choysen  decon  conveiner  thairof  for  the  year 
insewing  and  q"  they  wer  goeing  about  the  doeing  of  the  samyne  compeired 
Johne  Hall  chirurgean  and  ane  of  the  lait  baiUies  of  this  burgh  and  producit 
Protestatioune  the  protesta~une  fallowing  subscryveit  be  Mathow  Willsowne  tanner  Robert 
Shers"''  Willsoune  hemerman  the  said  Johne  Hall  Thomas  Campbell  Ninian  Gilhagie 

Walter  and  Patrick  Bryces  and  James  Elphingstoune  quhairof  the  teno'' 
fallowes.  Quhairas  thair  are  severall  compleants  tabled  befor  his  highnes  counsell 
of  stait  in  Scotland  against  severall  persounes  be  severall  of  the  honest  men 
of  the  treades  qlks  complents  ar  remittit  to  Johne  Bell  present  provest  of  this 


Persounes 
electit  to  be 
put  on  the 
deacon 
conveiners 
lytt. 


1658]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  357 

brugh  and  Johne  Grahame  lait  proveist  thairof  and  since  within  thes  serall 

complents  it  was  humblie  desyied  that  no  deacon  conveiner  should  be  choysen 

till  the  severall    incorpora'unes  compleiners  war  established  in  thair  just 

rightes  and   piiviledges  and   lykwayes   thair    are    severall    persounes  being 

wncapabille  to  bear  ony  pubUct  trust  in  this  comoune  wealth  be  the  humblie 

petitiounc  and  advys  who  are  members  heir  and  being  vncapablle  to  be  lyttit 

so  to  votte  in  ony  elcctiounc  to  persounes  of   publict   trust,  lykas   ther   are 

serall  persounes  members  quhom  the  law  docs  not  reach  quho  are  members 

of  this  iudicatorie  and  not  warned  as  aught  to  hea\'e  bein  and  so  slighted, 

thairfor  and  for  divers  wther  rcassounes  we  for  ourselves  and  in  name  of  the 

Weill  effectit   tradsmen  within    this    burgh    doe    protest    against    your    pnt 

nomina~une  as  voyd  and  null  in  itself  quhairvpone  the  said  Johne  Hall  askit 

instalments  for  himself  and  in  name  and  behalf  of  all  that  would  adhear  to 

him  and  the  sd  protesta'une  and  then  the  sd  Johne  Hall  and  wthers  wha  did 

accompany  h'm  with  the  foirsaid  Thomas  Lockhart  being  removed  with  sundrie 

wthers  of  the  sd  decon  conveiners  counsell  quhilk  being  done  the  foirsaid 

hail  decons  of  craftis  (the  sd  Thomas  Lockhart  being  exceptit)  did  remaine  still 

in  the  sd  hospitall  and  with  thame  theis  persounes  fallowing  of  the  saide  deacon 

conveiners  last  choysen   counsell  to   wit   \\'ilham  Nyllsoune   Manasses  Lyll  NeUsone 

James  Wadrope  Johne  Kerr  Michael  Watsowne  George  Broome  George  Clark  ^  ^'^ '  Pieces. 

Wilham   Boyd  Johne  Otterburne   Johne   Lindsay   Robert   Tennant  Thomas 

Laurie   Wilham   Craig   Robert   Snype   George  Findlay  Androw   Jap    David 

Robesowne  Daniell  Browne  Robart  Boyd  William  Scheilles  Williame  Falconer 

and  did  sett  downe  the  lyttes  for  choyseing  out  of  thrie  persownes  of  thair 

number  to  the  effect  abovewryttine  and  the  haill  number  being  devydit  in  sex 

severall  lyttis  out  of  the  qlks  wer  choysen  ane  persoune  out  of  ilk  lytte  quhilk 

made  vpe  the  number  of  sex  persounes  quhilk  sex  being  put  out  in  on  lytt  thes 

thrie  of  thame  to  wit  the  saides  William  Walter  Neillsounes  and  Manasses  Lyll 

wer  electit  out  of  the  number  of  the  sds  sex  persounes  to  be  pntit  to  the  saides 

magistrates  and  counsell  to  the  effect  foirsaid  and  appoyntes  the  sd  lytte  to 

be  pntit  be  the  sd  WiUiam  Boyd  and  Robert  Marschell.     Lykeas  the  same 

day  in  the  efternoone  ther  being  againe  conveined  in  the  sd    hospitall  the 

forsaides  haill  persounes  abovenamed  quha  did  remaine  efter  the  reading  of 

the  foirsaid  protesta'une  and  maid  choys  of  the  said  lytte  togither  with  Gavine 

Scott  AUexander  Holmes  Gabriell  Cumyng  Patrick  Bryce  elder  Johne  Birscat 

wther  sex  of  the  sd  decon  conveiners  last  cho3'sen  counsell  quha  all  of  them 

taking  to  thair  serious  considera~une  how  that  it  had  pleased  the  sds  magrates 

and  counsell  of  this  brugh  not  to  nominat  and  elect  ane  deacon  conveiner 

out  of  the  foirsaid  lytte  pntit  to  them  for  that  effect  according  to  the  Ire  of 

gildrie  and  old  vs  wonted  observed  heirtofoir  and  the  abovenamed  persounes 

conveined  as  sd  is  having  ane  guid  and  gret  respect  to  the  weill  of  the  severall 

tredes  within  this  burgh  and  considering  that  if  ordor  be   not    keiped   and 

observed  amongst  thame  thair  haill  maters  will  be  neglectit  and  all  things 


358  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1658 

lelaiting  to  thair  flurishing  estait  (quhairof  thair  predecessors  hes  bein  so  cairfuU 
heirtofoir)  will  not  faill  to  tume  to  disorder  and  confuissione  to  all  thair  great 
hurtes  and  mine  and  thairfor  for  the  better  keeping  of  good  ordor  amitie  love 
and  peace  amongst  themselves  does  hermoniously  and  vnanimously  agrie  and 
condescend  to  mak  choys  of  ane  persowne  to  be  preces  amongst  them  quha 
sail  preceid  in  all  things  ony  wayes  concerning  the  weillfair  of  the  serall  craftes 
within  this  burgh  and  that  dureing  this  intervall  of  tyme  quhill  ane  deacon 
conveiner  be  choysen  to  quhom  they  all  promis  that  dew  respect  and  obedience 
as  becometh  and  exceidinglie  thairto  it  was  the  desyre  of  all  the  persounes 
conveined  that  tlie  saides  \\"illiam  Walter  Neilsounes  and  Manasses  Lyll  should 
be  putt  on  lytt  that  one  of  them  might  be  electit  preces  dureing  the  said  space 
quha  being  removed  the  afoirsaid  Androw  Mudie  baillie  foirsd  haveing  the 
voyce  of  every  persoune  pnt  thairanent  the  saides  haill  persounes  pnt  without 
descrepens  did  wnanimously  mack  choys  of  the  said  Walter  Neilsowne  to  be 
preces  as  said  is  quha  being  callit  in  againe  did  accept  the  said  chairge  and 
promist  to  doe  his  best  thairintill  according  to  his  power  for  the  weill  of  the 
sds  haill  tredes  as  allsoe  the  foirsaids  haill  persounes  considering  that  the 
first  thing  they  had  to  doe  for  observing  of  guid  ordor  was  to  choyse  out  four 
craftismen  to  be  on  the  deane  of  gilds  counsell  conforme  to  the  Ire  of  gildrie 
q"  ane  new  electioune  and  the  sds  Walter  Neillsowme  new  electit  preces  haveing 
cravit  the  ad\'ys  of  the  saides  haill  persounes  thairanent  they  all  vnanimously 
condiscendit  and  agried  that  the  last  four  choysen  for  that  effect  to  wit  William 
Nillsoune  Johne  Miller  Johne  Ker  and  Robert  Carathers  sould  remayne  on 
that  chairge  q"  ane  new  electioune. 

Vigesimo  nono  Octobris  1658. 

Ane  anser  to  The  same  day  Walter  Neilsoune  preces  with  the  decones  of  craftes  and 

t'he^counseU.  thair  breathrine  of  counsall  being  conveined  quha  for  the  maist  pairt  wer 
present  and  taking  to  thair  considera'une  how  that  the  magistrates  had  given 
out  ordo'"s  that  all  the  Ires  of  deaconheid  sould  be  exhibiett  and  producet 
befor  them  efter  advyce  and  delebira'une  had  tjieranent  it  was  concludit 
that  the  anser  to  be  given  to  the  counsell  theranent  sould  be  delayed  in  a  fair 
calme  way  quhill  first  ane  decon  conveiner  be  choysen  and  appointes  Robert 
Mairschell  Johne  Baquhanane  elder  and  Robert  Carathers  to  compear  on 
setting  the  night  befor  the  counsell  and  requeists  their  IoP^  to  deceist  quhill 
ane  deacon  conveiner  be  choj^sen  and  this  place  then  will  indevore  to  give 
all  content. 

Decimo  guinto  Novembris  1658. 

Double  of  ane  The  qlk  day  Walter  Neilsoune  preces  did  exhibit  and  produce  in  presence 

be^'wa'itCT  ""'  of  the  haill  decons  of  crafts  and  thair  brethren  of  counsall  ane  peaper  sub' 

Neilsoune         j^g  jj^j^j  ^s  ressonablle  overtour  for  removeing  of  the  present  differences  quhilk 
preces.  u  * 


1658]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  359 

was  publictly  read.  The  sd  Walter  desyred  therefter  the  sd  paper  to  be 
bulked  and  keeped  in  renientcs  of  the  qlk  the  tenor  fallowes.  That  quheras 
it  is  not  wnknown  to  this  meting  the  grait  debaites  qch  hath  bein  betwixt 
Johne  ^^'ood  Mathow  Wilsoune  James  Thomsone  and  wthers  of  ther  tred 
James  Blair  and  Androw  Scot  tailzers  William  Govean  glover  James  Elphing- 
stoun  glasier  Johne  Burnes  Robert  Wilsoune  James  Jonestoune  and  severall 
wthers  of  the  heinermen  tred  qiiho  contrary  to  all  law  of  the  brugh  and  practise 
of  this  hous  and  the  neabcr  lyk  practised  cours  they  have  disauned  the  sd  hous 
and  takin  me  befoir  the  counscll  of  estait  and  thair  did  challeng  me  most 
vnjustly  and  albiet  they  did  nominat  me  only  in  thair  compleantes  zitt  the 
haill  hous  of  deacones  is  aymed  at  I  being  bot  one  man  and  in  all  the  things 
alledged  against  me  I  haveing  done  nothing  bot  as  being  appointed  from  the 
sd  hous  and  thair  actes  and  from  the  waranting  me  to  doe  it  the  qch  procedo'' 
of  thers  hath  occasioned  much  discovery  of  our  awin  neakednes  to  strangers 
and  throw  the  sd  persounes  protesting  without  ane  ordo""  from  the  hous  hath 
lykwaves  hindered  the  nominating  of  ane  deacon  conveiner  to  us  by  the 
counsall  and  lykwajes  hath  occasioned  the  magistrates  for  caUing  in  questioune 
our  letters  of  deaconry  qch  had  not  bein  in  vse  if  this  ther  appeirance  in 
challenging  ws  pubhctly  had  not  bein  notwithstanding  of  all  qch  finding 
myself  obleidged  to  doe  for  the  weill  of  the  hous  and  in  so  doeing  most  of 
necessity  be  ane  sufferer  in  my  good  name  by  silently  passing  by  so  fai'e  as  I 
cane  thir  great  abuss  done  to  me  I  am  content  that  qtsumever  hath  bein  done 
by  me  be  judged  by  the  hous  of  deacones  quho  are  the  most  proper  judges 
of  all  such  differences  and  q'  they  sail  doe  therin  sail  stand  to  it  proveyding 
that  the  forsds  persounes  sail  doe  the  samyne  and  pas  frome  the  compeirances 
befoir  others  nor  the  sd  hous  and  if  thej'  will  not  doe  the  samyne  I  hope  it 
cannot  be  judged  be  any  that  I  sail  be  the  occasioune  of  anj'  inconveniences 
that  com  to  the  hous  by  such  ane  evill  preparative  and  doe  heirby  exoner 
myself  in  caice  of  ther  refuisall  hopeing  the  sd  hous  will  assist  all  thes  that 
doeth  adher  to  their  decisive  voice  of  all  differences  betwixt  \\s  to  qch  I  am 
most  willing  to  adher. 

The  same  day  ordaines  Johne  Ker  collecto''  to  furnish  coallcs  to  the  poor 
in  the  hospitall  as  formerly. 

The  same  day  appoynts  Baillie  Moodie  Manasses  Lyll  Thomas  Campbell  Act  anent 
Johne  Miller  maltman  Johne  Miller  tailyeo"-  Ro'  Marschell  couper  Jo"  Scot  f°|!i°an'Jfto' 
baxter  to  meit  and  convein  and  cognosce  quhat  is  awand  to  the  severall  trads  f^e  hospital! 

°  '  be  the  seu^raU 

of  the  rents  of  Gorballs  and  to  sie  them  payit  out  of  the  first   pairt   of   the  trades. 
reddiest  of  the  hous  rents  and  q*  is  left  wnpayit  that  way  to  tack  some  bands 
out  of  the  box  and  pay  the  saime  becaus  formerly  the  money  that  should  have 
payit  them  was  applyed  to  the  hospitalls  wse  and  appoyntes  Patrick  Bryce 
and  Ninian  Andersoune  to  fitt  ther  compts  with  Johne  Ker. 


36o 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1658 


Overto' 
proponit  be 
the  preces  for 
removing  of 
differances. 


Tcrlio  Dccembris  1658. 

The  said  day  appoyntes  Thomas  Campbell  to  convein  theis  wha  wer 
formerlie  appoyntit  to  cognosce  the  debtis  awand  out  of  the  Goiballs  rent  to 
the  severall  trads. 

The  sd  day  Androw  Moodie  baiUie  \A'alter  Neilsoune  lait  deacon  con- 
vemei"  and  now  pieces  \\ith  the  deacones  of  craftes  and  wther  bretherin  of 
counsel!  quha  for  the  most  pairt  wer  present  being  conveined  it  was  proponit 
be  the  sd  Walter  Neilsoune  that  he  thought  it  convenient  for  removing  of  the 
present  differances  amongest  some  of  the  trads  and  the  hous  intres  that  it 
war  guid  that  some  calme  peacable  men  wer  choysen  to  advys  wpon  some 
overtoures  the  best  they  can  for  removing  yof  that  theis  maters  againe  be 
not  brought  in  ony  publict  hearing  and  for  this  effect  it  was  condescendit 
and  agried  wpon  that  the  sd  Androw  Moodie  baillie  Thomas  Campbell  sumtyme 
ane  of  the  bailleis  of  this  burgh  Ro'  Marschell  couper  and  Michael  Watsoune 
weaver  should  be  lor  the  hous  pairt  and  for  the  wther  pairteis  intrest  Johne 
Hall  lait  baillie  Thomas  Lockheart  aputhecar  Jo°  Buchannan  elder  baxter 
and  Patrick  Bryce  maltman  and  they  ar  to  meitt  with  the  best  conveniencie 
to  think  and  advyce  wpon  the  saids  overtops  and  y^'efter  to  exhibit  and  produce 
the  samyne  in  \\rytt  to  the  said  ^^'alte^  Neilsoune  to  the  effect  the  samyne 
may  be  considered  and  tliought  wpon  be  the  haill  deacones  of  trades. 


Coppie  of 

overto's 

producit. 


Vigcsimo  scptimo  Dccembris  165S. 

The  qlk  day  Androw  Moodie  bailUe  with  the  pticullar  deacones  of  crafts 
fallowing  viz  Alex''  Jafra  deacon  of  hamermen  Ro'  Caruthers  deacon  of  tailyeo''s 
James  Waddrop  lait  deacon  of  cordoners  Jo"  Miller  visito""  of  maltmen  Jo" 
Falconer  deacon  of  weavers  Wilham  Huntar  deacon  of  skinners  Thomas 
Loklieart  deacon  of  chirurgians  Jo"  Scot  deacon  of  baxters  Ro*  Marschell 
deacon  of  cowpers  Ro'  Broom  deacon  of  flesho''s  Jo"  Clark  deacon  of  measounes 
Jo"  Colquhoune  deacon  of  wrights  and  Ninian  Spens  deacon  of  bonetmakers 
being  all  conveined  in  the  craftis  hospitall  their  was  producit  ane  paper  con- 
teining  ane  coppie  of  the  overtoures  given  in  anent  the  removing  of  the  pnt 
differences  amongst  some  of  the  treds  within  this  bur*-  and  efter  reiding  yof 
it  was  desyred  be  the  deacones  that  they  might  have  some  space  to  considder 
ywpon  befor  they  gi\'e  ane  anser  therto  qi'to  it  was  answered  be  the  said 
Thomas  Lockheart  ane  of  the  setters  doune  of  the  saids  overtoures  that  it 
wold  be  sufficient  to  gi\e  ane  anser  yto  within  ten  or  twelfe  dayes  qi'wnto  they 
did  acquiesce. 

{No  date.     Probably  October  1660.] 

Forsuameikle  as  about  this  tyme  befon^  wr^lten  ther  haveing  fallen  out 
some  vnhappie  and  vnlucken  differences  amongs  the  tredsmen  within  this 


i66ol        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  361 

burgh  qiihilk  was  the  causs  of  great  di\isiounes  amongs  them  and  the  ane 
pairtie  of  them  incl\-ning  moir  to  seek  the  help  and  ayd  of  the  Ingleishe  and 
wthers  adherent  to  them  was  be  them  most  favoured  and  ane  chairge  being 
given  for  dclyvcric  of  this  buik  and  wther  compts  belonging  to  the  crafts 
hospitall  and  the  samyne  being  suspendit  was  in  ane  vncouth  maner  decydit 
be  Judge  Ker  in  ther  favours  in  tj-me  of  vacancie  quherby  this  buik  was 
randerit  to  the  pairtie  chairger  who  hes  made  noe  vse  thereof  since  but  made 
ane  new  book  of  ther  awine  and  hes  caused  wrytt  therintill  what  they  have 
actit  sen  syne  and  now  God  having  of  his  awine  great  mcrcie  and  goodnes 
returned  our  gracious  king  to  his  awine  throne  and  dignitie  and  lykwayes 
hes  restoared  to  the  land  judges  of  ther  awine  as  of  old  whcrupone  the  Earle 
of  Glencairnc  chancellar  haveing  direct  ane  letter  to  ane  meitting  of  the 
burrowes  holdin  at  Edinburgh  the  fyftine  day  of  September  last  it  was  concludit 
be  the  comissionars  of  burrowes  for  the  tyme  and  statut  and  ordained  that  noe 
persoune  or  persounes  who  contryvit  or  subscryvit  the  remonstrance  or 
assosciatiounes  or  concurred  in  the  prosecutioune  of  any  cours  for  promoveing 
the  ends  thereof  or  protestit  against  any  publict  judicatories  ther  determina- 
tiounes  or  any  wther  way  disaffected  to  his  majesties  government  or  indevoured 
be  factioune  or  seditioune  to  disturb  his  majesties  peice  that  non  such  sould 
be  admittit  to  any  place  of  magistracie  counsell  or  any  office  of  deaconrie  or 
any  wther  chairge  within  burgh  quhilk  act  therefter  was  ratefied  be  the  right 
honourabllc  the  coifiittee  of  estaits  and  therby  the  forsaid  pairtie  who  inclj'ncd 
most  to  the  Inghshe  wer  layd  asyd  and  vse  was  made  of  wthers  and  speciallie 
thes  who  did  bear  office  in  anno  1648  and  Manasses  Lyll  being  deacon  convinar 
the  said  year  was  appoyntit  be  thes  in  power  to  convein  tlie  deacones  of  treds 
and  to  set  doune  the  lytts  out  of  such  who  wer  fund  capable  to  bear  office  for 
electing  the  deacon  convinar  for  the  year  enshewing  quhilk  was  done  accordinglie 
and  this  preface  appoyntit  heir  to  be  insertand  vse  to  be  made  of  this  buik  for 
inserting  of  ther  acts  and  proceedings  concerning  the  craftsmen  within  this 
burgh  and  to  miskend  the  former  new  book  made  as  said  is. 

At  Glasgow  the  tenth  day  of  Ociohor  1660. 

The  quhilk  daj'  Manasses  Lj'll  sometyme  deacon  conviner  of  this  burgh 
haveing  by  \'ertew  of  the  power  grantit  to  him  conveaned  the  deacones  of 
crafts  new  and  old  and  vthcrs  of  the  craftsmen  for  electing  thrie  of  ther  number 
to  be  presentit  to  the  provest  baillies  and  counsell  of  this  burgh  and  wthers 
haveand  intres  that  ane  pcrsone  might  be  clectit  out  of  the  saids  thrie  persounes 
to  beir  office  as  deacon  conviner  of  ys  burgh  for  the  yeir  enshe\\ing  be  pluralitie 
of  vottes  thes  thrie  persounes  fallouing  wer  electit  to  the  effect  forsaid  to  wit 
Manasses  Lyll  Walter  Neilsoune  and  Robert  Caruthers  and  ordaincs  the  said 
lytt  to  be  presented  be  George  Clark  present  deacon  of  skinners  and  Ro' 
Marshell  couper. 


362 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOXA'. 


[1660 


Theiefter  the  said  Manasses  Lj'll  was  chosen  deacon  convinar  who  made 
choyse  of  ye  persounes  fallouing  to  be  on  counsell  w'  him  for  the  yeir  enshewing . 


Deacones 


Johne  Maxuell 

Johne  Birscat 

Johne  Listoune 

James  Robesoune  elder 

Archibald  Glen 

Johne  Clark 

James  Frank 

Johne  Ker  baillie 


Niniane  Andersoune  visitour 

Gabriell  Cumyng 

George  Clark 

Cuthbert  Greg 

Robert  Broome 

W'Bi  Craig 


Alexander  Jafray 
David  Robesoune 
Alexander  Goveane 
Patrick  M''Ilvickar 
Johne  Young 

Jo"  Millar 
Robert  Caruthers 
Roi  Boyd 
Win  Fergusoune 
W"i  Johnestone 

James  Waddrope 
Gabriel  Corbett 
James  Mitchell 
Robert  Gairner 
Jolme  Coats 

Johne  Buchannane  yor 
Daniell  Purdoune 


Johne  Falconer 
Andrew  Lie 
David  Pitcairne 

Daniel  Broune 


Wilhame  Neilsoune 
Andrew  Moodie 
\\'alter  Neilsone 
Jo"  Miller 
Archibald  Scheilles 

\\"i  Bovd 


James  Colquhoune 
\\ '»  Reid 

Jlichael  Gilmour 
Alex''  Holmes 


Andrew  Luive 
\V"i  Huntar 

Robert  Marshell 
James  Andersoune 
\\'»  Sheilles 


Ro'  Craig 

George  Findlay  litster 
Jo"  Lindsay  litster 

Andrew  Ralstoune  gairner 
Ro'  Tennent  gairner 


i66o]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  363 

Vigesimo  sepiimo  Odobris  1660. 

The  said  day  ye  deacon  conveinar  deacones  of  ciaftis  and  bretherin  of  Counseii 
their  counseii  being  conveincd  who  for  ye  far  most  pairt  wer  pnt  gave  their  ^"°™"=- 
oathes  to  be  faithfull  and  trcw  counsello''s  to  the  sd  deacon  conveinar  for  ye 
year  enshewing. 

The  same  day  Williame  Zair  contcinowed  dark  who  pnt  did  accept  and  z^ir  Clark. 
give  his  oath  as  wse  is. 

The  same  day  it  is  concludit  be  ye  haill  persones  pnt  that  ye  lait  deacon  old  deacon 
of  everie  craft  sail  be  alwayes  on  of  the  deacon  conveiners  counseii  for  that  counseii.' 
year  and  it  sail  not  be  ye  power  and  optioune  of  any  new  intrant  deacone  to 
hold  him  of  ye  samyne  in  respect  it  hes  bein  ane  conteino\\ed  wse  and  most 
agriable  to  reasoune. 

The  same  day  be  pluralitie  of  vots  David  Robesoune  beltmaker  is  choysen  Robesoune 

collecto' 
collector  who  being  pnt  did  accept  and  give  his  oath  as  wse  is. 

The  same  day  Robert  Marschell  lait  deacon  of  coupers  having  given  in  Marschcll. 

complent  against  Cuthbert  Grege  pnt  deacone  of  coupers  for  y'  he  had  in  a 

privat  way  made  choyse  of  his  mi's  of  craft  for  ane  j'ear  inshewing  at  the  verie 

tyme  q"  ye  said  Ro'  was  appoyntit  to  be  admittit  as  ane  of  ye  four  for  ye  New  deacon 

trads  to  be  on  ye  deane  of  gilds  counseii  and  wheras  he  should  have  bein  ane  "°^  d°  rcon'  "^ 

of  the  first  of  the  mi's  and  have  had  ane  speciall  key  of  ye  box  yit  ye  sd  Cuthbert  from  being  a 

-^        J  ./      J  m'  of  craft. 

had  altogither  debaiTed  him  therfra  and  ye  sd  Cuthbert  being  pnt  could  not 

denay  the  same  and  therwpon  the  forsaid  deacon  conveiner  deacones  of  craft 

and  haill  counseii  pnt  ordaines  ye  sd  Cuthbert  to  make  ye  aforsaid  Robert 

Marshell  compleiner  ane  of  ye  first  mi's  of  the  craft  for  ye  year  enshewing  and 

give  him  ane  speciall  key  of  ye  box  as  wse  and  custoume  hes  bein  ever  heirtofoir 

amongst  ye  haill  trads  past  memorie  of  man  and  for  eshewing  of  ye  lyk  wrong 

heirafter  it  is  statut  and  ordained  that  it  sail  not  be  leasume  to  no  new  deacon 

of  tred  heirafter  to  put  3'e  old  deacon  who  bear  office  as  deacon  ye  year  befor 

him  from  bearing  office  as  ane  of  the  mi's  of  craft  and  to  be  the  first  of  y""  and 

to  have  ane  speciall  key  of  ye  box. 

The  same  day  be  pluralitie  of  vots  Ro'  Adame  tailzco''  is  choysen  off'  Adame  off', 
who  being  pnt  gave  his  oath  as  wse  is. 

The  same  day  forsuameikle  as  it  is  now  cleirlie  wnderstood  be  the  haill  Non  to  be 
persones  pnt  that  ye  conteinowing  of  ane  persone  deacon  longer  nor  ane  year  io^nger°nor  a 
of  his  trade  hes  made  much  evill  and  wrong  in  ye  calling  and  altho  it  hes  bein  >'*=*"■• 
oft  heirtofoir  dischargit  zit  it  lies  no'  bein  so  punctuallie  observit  as  it  owght 
to  be  and  therfor  for  eshewing  ye  lyk  heirafter  it  is  enactit  statut  and  ordained 


364 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1660 


that  no  persone  qtsoinever  be  langer  keeped  on  as  deacon  of  his  craft  nor  ane 
\'ear  allenerlie  and  }•*  wnder  ye  paine  of  ane  hundreth  punds  scots  to  be  payit 
in  be  j-'  calling  who  contra\-eines  to  ye  hospitall  for  ye  helpe  and  supplie  of 
ye  poore  yintilJ  and  \\y''s  at  3-6  optioune  of  ye  deacon  conveinar  and  deacones 
and  ordaines  this  act  to  be  intimat  be  ilk  deacon  to  his  craft. 


Liitoune 
swonie. 


Baxters. 


The  same  daj'  Jolme  Listounc  laitlie  cho3sen  deacon  of  ye  cordeners 
gave  his  oath  as  vse  is. 

This  day  in  respect  \-'  Jo"  Buchannan  yo"'  being  deacon  of  his  craft  this 
last  j-ear  had  violat  and  brokin  ane  act  of  their  caUing  discharging  anj-  persone 
to  beir  office  as  deacon  yintill  [longer]  y°  ane  year  and  that  he  now  had  gottin 
himselfe  conteinowed  deacon  for  ane  \'ear  to  cum  qlk  he  could  not  denay  and 
therfor  ordaines  \-e  calUng  to  be  convcined  againe  and  to  mak  choys  of  ane  of 
ye  last  yeares  mi'es  to  be  deacon  of  ye  craft  for  ye  year  enshewing. 


Secundo  Nove'is  1660. 

This  day  the  deacon  conveinar  deacones  of  craftis  and  bretherin  of  y'' 
counseU  being  con\'eined  who  for  ye  most  pairt  \\er  pnt  appoj^nts  Jo°  Ker 
bailhe  w'  ye  deacon  conveinar  and  Walter  Neilsoune  3'e  deacons  of  hamermen 
and  tailzeo'"s  the  visito""  of  maltmen  and  Ro'  Marschell  lait  deacon  of  coupers 
to  reveise  3'e  compt  of  Alex''  Daniziell  lait  collecto''  as  also  the  haill  acts  sett 
doune  in  \'c  new  buik  thir  twa  yeares  b3'gain  and  to  mak  report  yanent. 


Qninto  Novc'is  1660. 

The  qlk  da3-  the  deacon  conveiner  deacones  of  craftis  and  bretherin  of 
3-''  counsell  being  conveined  who  lor  ye  most  pairt  war  pnt  the  persones  above 
named  whois  names  ar  conteined  in  ye  former  act  having  made  report  that 
they  had  at  lenth  red  and  revised  the  compt  now  produced  be  Alex''  Daniziell 
and  that  with  much  paines  w^  3-6  helpe  of  ye  sd  Alex"^  Daniziell  they  had  com 
to  3-6  right  wnderstanding  therof  so  neir  as  could  be  and  finds  therby  (charge 
and  discharge  being  compared)  there  was  restand  in  the  compter  Alex""  Daniz- 
ieles  hands  the  sowine  of  thrie  hundreth  f3'ftie  four  punds  f3've  shilling  four 
pennies  and  becaus  3'e  forsaid  compt  could  not  be  formallie  booked  it  was 
ordained  that  3-e  sowme  restand  should  be  booked  becaus  its  to  be  pa3'it  to 
the  new  collecto''  and  he  chargit  ywith  and  the  compt  producit  be  the  said 
Alex'  to  be  put  in  the  box  and  keepit  in  rdentis  and  in  regard  the  said  Alex'' 
Daniziell  did  mak  instanthe  reall  and  thankfull  pay*  to  the  sd  David  Robesoune 
now  pnt  collecto'  of  ye  sd  sowme  of  thrie  hundreth  fyftie  four  punds  fyve 
shilling  four  penneis  the  sd  deacon  conveinar  deacones  of  craftis  and  there 
sd  counsell  doe  cxoncr  and  dischaiigc  yc  sd  Alex''  DanizcU  accordinglie. 


i66o]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  365 

Fallowes  the  catollogiie  of  the  sowmes  of  monye  awand  to  the  craftis 
hospitall  be  bands. 

In  the  first  there  is  awand  be  Johne  Colquhoune  wright  and  his  cawtioners 

by  their  band  ane  thousand  marks  q'"of  there  will  be  ane  yeares  afi  rent 

awand  at  ye  terme  of  Mertimes  1660. 
Item  be  W""  Andersoune  younger  of  Newtoune  and  be  his  caw''^^  conforme 

to  the  band  fyve  hundreth  marks  q'"of  ye  an  rent  is  awand  sen  the  terme 

of  Witsonday  1660. 
Item  awand  be  W"  Couts  and  his  caw^''^  by  band  fyve  hundreth  marks  q''of 

there  will  be  ane  yeares  an  rent  awand  at  Mertimes  1660. 
Item  there  was  adebtit  to  the  said  hospitall  be  wmq"  James  Duncan  haiherman 

ane  thousand  marks  prinll  sowme  whilk  should  have  payit  aii  rent  for  ye 

terme  of  Mertimes  jajvjc  fyftie  and  sex  and  of  all  yes  aii  rents  bygaine 

Alex'  Daniziell  lait  collecto''  hes  only  gottin  thrie  scoir  four  punds  as  his 

compt  beares  and  in  securitie  of  the  monye  the  sd  hospitall  is  infeft  in 

wmq"  James  Duncans  land  in  Saltmercat. 
Item  wmq"  George  Lyoune  was  awand  to  ye  sd  hospitall  thrie  hundreth  punds 

prinll  sowme  and  at  Candlemes  1658  there  was  awand  of  an  rent  eightine 

punds  and  ye  ah  rent  is  ever  awand  sen  syne. 
Item  be  Jo"  Miller  tailzeo''  be  band  four  hundreth  marks  q'oi  ye  ah  rent  is 

awand  sen  Witsonday  1658. 
Item  awand  be  Ro'  Huntar  of  Whytsyd  ane  hundreth  twintie  ane  punds  ten 

shilling  as  being  the  equall  halfe  of  ye  sowme  priiill  conteined  in  his  band. 
Item  wmq"  Edward  Hamiltoune  of    SilvertounhiU  being  adebtit  to  wmq" 

Androw  Mylne  fourtie  punds  scots  the  band  ye  sd  laird  gave  yfor  was 

drawne  wp  in  wmq"  Jo"  Selkrigs  name  and  at  ye  desyre  of  ye  sd  wmq" 

Androw  Mylne  he  assignit  ye  same  to  ye  hospitall  q''of  y""  was  no  pairt 

payit  ay"'  of  ah  rent  nor  prinll  sowme  payit  sen  syne. 
Item  be  Jo"  Bar  skiner  as  prinll  Patrick  M<^Ilviker  hamerman  and  Neil  Maxwell 

in  (  )  as  caw''^  for  him  ane  hundreth  punds  scots  qi'of  ye  aii 

rent  is  awand  for  Lambes  1658. 
Item  be  Alex''  Goveane  be  his  band  ane  hundreth  marks  qlk  is  paj'able  w'out 

an  rent  at  Witsonday  1661. 
Item  there  is  awand  to  the  hospitall  be  Johne  Bomanno  candlemaker  be  his 

band  four  scoir  punds  monye  qlk  is  payable  w'out  ah  rent  at  ye  first  day 

of  Apryll  nixt  to  cum  i6Gr. 

Tlie  same  day  there  was  dely\'crit  to  tlie  collectour  the  bands  fallowing  Bands 
to  be  put  to  executioune  and  for  vsing  his  best  meanes  to  geat  in  the  sowmes  ^f  j^^oi"'  t'°ur 
therin  conteaned  to  wit  Johne  Bars  band  Robert  Huntars  band  with  wthers 
belonging  therto  Silvertounhills  band  with  the  assignatioune  made  therto. 


366 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1660 


Memorandum. 


Litiljohnp 
placed  in  ye 
bospitall. 


Young  and 
Pollock. 


Gib  Raltoune 
Mitchell  and 
Cuthbert. 


Jonet  Scheilles  in  Gorballes  is  awand  to  the  hospitall  of  bygaine  aii  rents 
twentie  marks  as  is  given  up  be  the  said  Alex""  Danizell  lait  collectour  of  her 
bygaine  dewties  and  that  sowme  and  all  is  payit  in  be  the  said  collectour  is 
monyes  dew  to  the  hospitall  for  its  pairt  of  the  Gorballs  rent  for  the  crope 
1659  as  is  declaired  be  the  said  Alexander  Danizell. 

The  same  day  be  pluralitie  of  vottes  James  Litiljohne  tailyo"'  is  admittit 
to  be  as  ane  of  the  poor  se.xe  men  to  be  susteaned  in  the  hospitall  and  ordaines 
the  collectour  to  pay  him  his  dews  conforme  to  the  vse  of  the  hous. 

The  same  day  seeing  Johne  Fultoune  elder  skinner  is  depairtit  this  lyfe 
who  had  in  pensioune  fourtie  eight  shilling  per  mensem  aff  the  hospitall  it  is 
this  day  concludit  that  the  samyne  be  delt  equallie  betwixt  James  Young 
skinner  and  Charles  Pollock  elder  couper  and  ordaines  the  collectour  to  answer 
them  accordinglie  therto  and  to  begine  for  this  present  moneth  of  November. 

The  same  day  the  collectour  is  appoyntit  to  pay  monethlie  to  Williame 
Gib  maltman  Thomas  Raltoune  maltman  and  David  Mitchell  tailyour  twentie 
four  shilling  to  ilk  ane  of  them  per  fnensem  conforme  to  the  former  warrands 
given  theranent  as  alsoe  to  give  to  James  Cuthbert  bonnetmaker  the  lyk 
sowme  monethlie  in  respect  of  the  great  infirmitie  of  his  eyes. 

Septimo  Novembris  1660. 
The  same  day  Manasses  Lyll  deacon  convinar  deacones  of  crafts  new  and 
lait  who  all  for  ye  most  pairt  wer  pnt  being  conveaned  it  was  pubhctlie  declaired 
be  ye  said  deacon  convinar  that  he  was  informed  that  sume  deacones  of  crafts 
had  allreddie  broken  the  act  set  downe  wpone  the  fyftine  day  of  September 
last  was  be  the  coiriisionars  of  burrowes  and  ratified  be  ye  coiriittee  of  estaits 
in  admitting  some  maisters  of  y  calling  who  wer  layd  asyd  as  falhng  wnder 
ye  compas  of  ye  sd  act  in  relatioune  to  deaconries  of  severall  treds  within 
the  samyne  and  y'  wthers  ar  desyring  libertie  to  fallow  that  practise  quhilk 
he  declaired  was  altogither  contrair  his  mynd  and  intentioune  but  y'  the  said 
act  should  be  keepit  inviolablie  conforme  to  ye  tenour  thereof  in  respect  it 
was  onlie  done  to  foment  the  vnhappie  differences  hes  bein  amongs  ye  treds 
of  ys  burgh  this  lang  tj-me  bygaine  in  tyme  of  ye  vsurpers  power  and  protestit 
that  if  any  had  broken  the  said  act  or  wer  of  intentioune  to  break  it  that  he 
might  be  trie  of  all  danger  could  fallow  therwpone  in  respect  he  had  intimatit 
the  samyne  to  them  quherupone  it  is  concludit  be  all  present  that  the  said 
act  should  not  be  broken  in  any  poynt  and  did  declair  that  they  wer  most 
willing  to  give  obedience  yto  and  ordained  be  y'"  all  that  if  any  deacon  had 
choysen  any  maisters  of  craft  who  wer  layd  asyd  as  falhng  wnder  the  compas 
of  ye  said  act  that  they  should  be  altered  and  thair  deacon  to  choyse  be 
himself  some  vther  famous  honest  man  of  y  repine  callings  who  fell  not  wnder 
ye  compas  of  ye  sd  act  to  be  maisters  of  y  craft  for  the  year  enshewing  and  y* 


i66i]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW  367 

noe  wthers  should  choyse  any  wther  m^  or  member  of  y  calling  but  conforme 
to  the  tenour  of  ye  said  act  and  gif  any  deacon  or  wthers  doe  in  the  contrair 
and  gives  not  obedience  to  the  said  act  should  nether  have  place  nor  voyce 
amongs  y"'  in  maters  relaiting  to  y  chairge  during  ye  said  space. 

The  said  day  ordaines  the  collecto"'  to  have  ane  warrand  for  the  sowrrie  Wairand. 
of  twentie  marks  deburst  to  him  for  clothes  bo*  to  Ro'  Adame  new  electit 
oificiar  and  foir  sextine  punds  deburst  be  him  to  Hector  Stewart  for  service 
done  to  the  trads. 

Decimo  quarto  Novembris  1660. 

The  same  day  Robert  Andersoune  sone  laull  to  George  Andersoune  in  Andersoune 
Schawfeild  is  bookit  prentis  w'  Niniane  Andersoune  present  visito"'  of  maltmen 
during  the  space  of  fyve  yeares  conforme  to  the  indento''  of  the  dait  of  thir 
pnts. 

Vigesimo  nono  No'is  1660. 

The  same  day  Androw  Moodie  gave  his  oath  as  ane  ordinarie  counsellor's  Moodie 
till  Michaelmes  nixt. 

Vigesimo  sexto  Januarij  1661. 

The  sd  day  ordaines  the  collecto''  to  pay  to  Thomas  Dunrimple  tailyeo"'  Warrands. 
twelfe  punds  for  his  supplie  and  four  punds  to  Catherin  Salmond  to  help  to 
put  her  son  to  the  colledge. 

Octavo  Februarij  1661. 

The  sd  day  wnlawes  Cuthberte  Grege  in  fyve  punds  for  disobaying  the  Grege 
act  set  doune  on  the  xxvij  of  October  last  anent  Ro'  Marschell  and  recom- 
mends to  the  visito""  and  Jo"  Miller  tailzeo'  to  sie  the  sd  act  put  to  executioune 
and  to  agrie  ye  pties. 

Vigesimo  sexto  Januarij  1661. 

The  sd  day  it  being  regraitit  be  the  deacon  convener  and  divers  wther  No  person  of 
honest  men  pnt  that  ye  meanes  and  rent  belonging  to  the  hospitall  is  greatlie  hel'a'^"o'or''''° 
diminished  be  the  bestowing  on  a  great  number  of  poore  people  who  ar  wther-  '"^" '"  ""^ 

°  °  r  r       r  jj^^j  to  get 

wayes  helped  and  ane  overtour  be  proponed  by  Manasses  Lyll  present  deacon  supplie. 
conveiner  that  q'  craft  had  ane  mane  in  the  hospitall  no  persone  in  that  calhng 
should  have  any  farder  supphe  yof  whilk  being  thought  wpon  and  considered 
it  was  yafter  condeschendit  vnto  be  the  sd  deacon  conveinar  deacones  of  craft 
and  haill  bretherin  of  counsell  who  for  ye  most  pairt  wer  pnt  all  w'  ane  consent 
that  q'  calling  hes  a  man  placed  in  the  hospitall  no  persone  belonging  to  that 
calling  nayf  weidow  nor  wy^s  sail  have  or  get  any  farder  supplie  aff  ye  hous 
nor  non  of  their  suplica'unes  heirafter  except  theis  old  decriptit  persones 


vnlawed. 


368 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1661 


who  ar  in  vse  of  pay*  of  any  pensioune  out  of  ye  hous  who  ar  to  have  the 
samyne  during  y''  lyftj'mes  and  ye  hous  will  and  pleaso''  and  after  yf  deceases 
their  is  no  lyk  pensiounes  to  be  grantit  to  no  persones  yafter. 


Currie  in 
hospitall. 
Warrand. 


The  sd  day  Jo"  Currie  tailzeof  is  placed  and  put  in  againe  in  the  hospitall 
but  he  is  to  have  no  pensioune  q"  Beltane  nixt  and  the  twelfe  pund  y'  should 
have  been  given  to  him  pntlie  the  collecto"'  is  appoyntit  to  give  the  samyne  to 
David  Calderwood  for  his  supplie. 


Act  reschind 
ing  sundrie 
former  actis. 


The  qlk  day  the  deacon  convciner  dcaconcs  of  craft  and  haill  brctherin 
of  their  counsell  who  for  the  most  pairt  wer  put  being  conveined  and  taking 
to  their  considera'une  that  forsuameikle  as  there  being  of  old  divers  decreits 
and  acts  set  doune  be  the  deacon  conveinar  deacons  of  craftis  and  their  counsell 
for  ye  tyme  against  James  Elphingstoune  glas  wright  Jo"  Daniziell  wright 
Johne  Cauldwall  Androw  Love  W™  Goveane  skinners  James  Farie  Ro'  Wilsoune 
Jo"  Leiper  W"  Philp  Jo"  Dunkiesoune  James  Pharie  and  Gawine  Park 
hamermen  and  wj'i'es  mentionat  in  the  sds  severall  decreits  and  that  for  their 
base  cariage  and  wther  misdemaners  conteined  yintill  wherby  and  for  wy'' 
causs  yin  speit  sundrie  of  them  wer  declared  wncapable  to  bear  any  charge 
in  their  repive  callings  ay''  to  have  vots  or  give  vots  q"  they  gave  satisfactioune 
for  the  sds  wrongs  mentionat  in  the  samyne  decreits  zit  ther  having  arysen 
amongs  the  trads  w*in  this  burgh  throw  the  occasioune  of  ane  dissatisfeit  pairtie 
many  vnhappie  and  vnlukie  differences  and  that  pairtie  having  throw  help  of 
ye  Inglish  and  wthers  who  affected  them  gottin  power  and  credit  of  ye  craftis 
hospitall  and  things  belonging  yto  and  be  occasioune  theirof  wpon  the  fyftine 
day  of  September  1659  yeares  they  did  not  only  pas  out  severall  decreits  and 
acts  cyteined  in  ane  new  book  made  by  y"  whilk  was  publictlie  red  in  presence 
of  all  present  annulhng  most  wnjusthe  the  acts  sett  downe  against  ye  forsds 
persones  but  also  they  sett  downe  severall  acts  and  decreits  against  James 
Phrank  Jolme  Kirkwood  James  Wadrop  and  W'"  Hunter  discharging  them 
from  medling  in  maters  concerning  y"'  serall  trads  and  in  theis  decreits  so  given 
out  by  that  wnhapie  vsurping  pairtie  almost  throw  the  wholl  of  y"i  they  have 
most  falslie  and  maliciouslie  vtred  and  set  doune  manye  fals  calumnies  ag* 
Manasses  Lyll  present  deacon  conveiner  and  Walter  Neilsoune  somtyme  ane 
of  ye  lait  baiUies  of  this  burgh  as  being  (as  they  alledgit)  the  maine  fomenters 
of  theis  vnhappie  divisiounes  for  y""  awine  pticular  ends  but  mainhe  against 
ye  said  Walter  \\heras  ther  was  no  such  thing  and  now  since  it  hes  pleased 
God  of  his  awine  great  mercie  and  guidnes  to  have  brought  bak  against  [?  again] 
our  most  gratious  king  to  his  thron  and  dignitie  and  things  begin  to  ran  again 
in  the  right  channell  and  that  publict  acts  and  ordinances  are  given  out  that 
such  as  wer  most  justlie  [?  unjustly]  thrust  from  their  places  ar  now  restored 
againe  yto  wherby  it  is  now  e\adentlie  sein  who  hes  bein  right  and  who  wrong 
and  who  hes  bein  seeking  their  awine  ends  and  no'  ye  weill  of  the  trads  w'in 


l66i]         RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGO\\'.  369 

this  burgh  conforme  to  the  guid  old  accustomed  maner  and  theifor  the  haill 
deacones  of  crafts  new  and  old  being  all  for  ye  most  pairt  present  doe  heirby 
reschind  cass  and  ariull  all  their  haill  decreits  acts  and  ordinances  given  out 
and  sett  doune  on  the  said  fyftine  day  of  September  1659  yeares  forsaid  lykas 
they  did  consider  that  they  war  sett  doune  be  theis  in  place  for  ye  tyme  for 
fomenting  of  theis  wnlukie  and  wnhappie  diferences  abovementioned  and  so 
to  be  holdin  and  reput  in  tyme  coming  as  tho  they  had  never  bein  set  doune 
and  ordaines  the  old  acts  formerhe  sett  doune  ag'  the  aforsds  persones  to  stand 
zit  in  full  force  and  strenth  against  y"'  and  sua  meikle  the  rather  becaus 
theis  persounes  all  for  ye  most  pairt  does  fall  wnder  ye  compas  of  that  act  sett 
doune  on  the  fyftine  day  of  September  last  be  the  burrowes  and  so  ar  therby 
declared  wncapable  to  bear  any  charge  in  their  severall  callings  q"  they  all  be 
cleired  be  the  paiha'  and  coinittee  of  staits  and  declares  heirby  to  all  that  the 
sds  Manasses  Lyll  and  Walter  Neilsoune  ar  altogither  frie  of  theis  bais  calumnies 
laid  against  }'"'  in  theis  saids  severall  decreits  sett  doune  on  the  said  fyftine 
day  of  September  1659  and  that  in  respect  it  is  now  cleired  by  all  the  publict 
acts  emittit  that  they  and  their  adherents  hes  only  walked  in  the  right  and 
straught  way  in  seeking  the  guid  of  ye  trads  w'in  this  burgh. 

The  same  day  complent  being  given  in  be  Alex^  Jafra  somtyme  deacon  of  Jafray. 
hamermen  bearing  that  some  of  ye  bretherin  of  his  calhng  especiallie  theis 
against  whom  ane  act  was  sett  doune  in  the  pnt  deaconveiners  tyme  for 
wronging  and  injuring  of  him  had  caused  ane  act  to  be  set  doune  in  the  lait 
vsurpers  tyme  against  him  that  he  should  never  have  any  charge  or  vott  in 
his  calling  and  y*  most  wnjustlie  he  never  being  hard  to  speak  for  himselfe 
qlk  being  considered  wpon  it  was  statut  and  ordained  that  ye  sd  act  should 
be  deleit  and  scored  out  of  their  buik  and  that  the  deacon  conveiner  Walter 
Neilsoune  Jo"  Miller  tailzeo''  and  Ro'  Marschell  sie  ye  same  done  and  ordaines 
Johne  Maxwell  pnt  deacon  of  hamermen  to  convein  his  mi's  and  produce  his 
book  q"so*i'  he  sail  be  required  for  yt  effect  be  ye  sd  deacon  cyveiner. 

Decimo  sexto  Fehruarij  1661. 

The  qlk  day  Manasses  Lyll  deacon  conveiner  with  ye  deacones  of  craftis  Marschell. 
new  and  old  who  for  the  most  pairt  wer  pnt  being  conveined  and  having  hard 
the  supphca*une  given  in  be  Allane  Marschell  sone  naturall  to  AUane  Marchell 
in  Lumloch  mackand  mentioune  that  q''  he  was  bund  prenteis  to  wq"  Jo" 
Fulertoune  wxight  and  payit  above  four  scoir  punds  of  prenteis  fie  and  it 
pleased  God  after  thrie  quarter  of  ane  year  to  call  his  m""  out  of  this  mortall 
lyfe  so  that  therby  he  both  lost  his  fie  and  got  no  learning  qlk  was  holdin  out 
and  remonstrat  divers  tymes  of  befor  be  his  sd  fay'  and  now  he  hes  bein  tossed 
to  and  fro  theranent  this  whol  year  bygaine  throw  instiga'une  of  some  tur- 
bulent bretherin  of  the  calhng  and  the  sd  Allanes  fay''  having  agried  w'  ye 
relict  who  had  only  intrest  in  him  being  her  husbands  prenteis  and  shoe  having 


370  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.         [1661 

grantit  ane  blank  assigna^une  to  him  for  inserting  any  bodies  name  thereintill 
and  the  fay''  having  delt  w'  John  Cors  wright  for  instructing  the  prenteis 
quhilk  he  acceptit  friehe  zit  the  turbulent  bryrin  of  ye  wrightis  wold  not  suffer 
the  prenteis  to  work  w'  ye  sd  Jo"  Cors  or  to  work  at  all  and  hes  caused  dis- 
charge him  to  work  so  that  the  boy  is  disapoyntit  of  his  calling  and  so  of  all 
lyfliehood  qlk  in  t^ine  may  prove  ane  verie  bad  exemple  to  honest  man  to 
bring  in  their  boyes  to  be  prenteiss  w'  tradsmen  as  the  sd  bill  mair  fullie 
proports  quhilk  being  callit  and  the  aforsd  deacon  conveiner  deacones  of  craft 
and  wthers  pnt  having  weill  weighted  and  considered  the  sd  complent  and  the 
veritie  yof  being  knowine  to  all  of  3-™  for  the  most  pairt  and  Gabriell  Cunyng- 
hame  pnt  deacone  of  wright  being  also  present  confessed  the  samyne  and 
grantit  all  was  trew  was  asserted  therintill  they  therafter  be  this  their  decreit 
and  sentance  decemes  and  declaires  that  it  sail  be  leasome  to  the  sd  Jo°  Cors 
to  keep  and  detein  the  sd  Allane  Marschell  pnteis  conforme  to  the  agriement 
made  w*  ye  sd  compleiners  fay''  and  him  yanent  and  y'  it  sail  not  be  leasome 
to  the  deacon  of  the  wrights  nor  non  of  that  calling  to  give  ony  discharge  in 
the  contrair  to  the  effect  the  compleiners  may  get  instructioune  in  his  trade 
and  [be]  made  capable  yby  for  wineing  of  his  lyfliehood  according  to  his  sd 
fayi's  designe  q"  he  first  band  him  prenteis. 

Ultimo  Febntarij  1661. 

Conveined  the  deacon  conveiner  Baillie  Ker  Walter  Xeilsoune 
w'  ye  deacones  of  tailzeo'"s  skinners  coupers  weavers  bonetmakers 
w'  nyne  old  deacones  and  the  coUecto''. 

simpsoune.  The  said  day  in  anser  to  the  supphca'une  and  complent  given  in  be  Ar^ 

Simpsoune  travello""  against  Jo"  Simpsoune  measoune  ordaines  the  sd  Johne 
to  enter  and  book  Ar"*  Simpsoune  his  prenteis  sone  to  the  sd  compleiner  in 
their  crafts  books  as  it  becumes  a  m"'  to  doe  to  his  servand  and  that  wnder 
the  pame  of  ane  hundreth  punds  monye  of  fyne  to  be  givin  in  to  the  hospitalles 
vse  and  farder  they  doe  heirby  statut  and  ordaine  that  the  boyes  no'  booking 
sail  not  be  prejudicial!  to  him  q"  he  enters  frieman  w'  ye  calling. 

Neiisoune  and  The  Said  day  it  was  concluded  that  some  of  their  number  should  goe  east 

^arut  ers  to  ^^  Edinburgh  to  concur  with  such  craftissmen  there  as  stands  for  defence  of 
the  gildrie  and  according  yto  they  made  choys  of  Walter  Neiisoune  and  Ro' 
Caruthers  to  ryd  east  for  that  effect  and  the  haill  expenss  and  charges  to  be 
deburst  ywpon  to  be  borne  be  the  haill  trads  according  to  their  rank  and 
qnaUtie  and  the  haill  deacones  to  subscryve  to  them  ane  comissioune  for  that 
effect 

Warrand  The  same  day  ordaines  the  coUecto''  to  give  to  George  Clark  to  be  given 

supplie.  ^Q  ^j^g  ppQj.  j^^^^  yt  ^yj^5  ^  captane  in  the  hilles  \v'  Glencaime  fyve  shillings 

starhng. 


i66i]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  371 

Decimo  Maij  1661. 

The  qlk  day  Manasses  Lyll  deacon  convinar  deacones  of  crafts  and  ther  Complent  ag' 
bretherine  of  counsell  being  conveined  in  ther  hospitall  wha  for  the  most 
pairt  wer  present  anent  the  complent  given  in  be  the  hamermen  vv'in  this 
burgh  against  Hugh  Andersone  cordoner  for  that  he  had  cutted  lether  and 
made  some  belts  yof  qlk  he  nor  nae  wther  craftsmen  w'in  this  burgh  aught  to 
have  done  in  respect  that  the  beltmakers  ar  appendices  of  the  hamermen 
craft  and  is  conteined  in  ther  Ire  of  deaconheid  qlk  is  notourlie  knoun  to  the 
deacon  convinar  and  sindrie  deacones  pnt  qlk  being  red  and  considdered  and 
the  said  deacon  conviner  and  wthers  forsaid  being  most  desyrous  to  interteane 
that  old  love  and  amitie  among  the  treds  that  aught  to  be  it  was  efter  voyceing 
declaired  that  it  was  noe  ways  leasome  to  the  sd  Hugh  nor  noe  wthers  of  his 
craft  to  mak  any  belts  it  being  ane  libertie  belonging  to  ye  sd  hamermen  in 
maner  as  sd  is  and  yfor  dischergit  the  said  Hugh  and  all  wthers  of  ye  sd  tred 
to  exerceis  the  lyk  heirefter. 

The  same  day  becaus  it  is  fund  be  Hugh  Andersoune  his  awine  confession  Andersoime 
that  he  cutted  and  made  ane  belt  efter  he  was  dischergit  be  the  deacon  conveiner 
to  doe  the  samy  he  is  yfoir  vnlawed  be  the  deacones  and  y  counsell  in  ten  punds 
and  Baillie  Ker  being  pnt  ordained  him  to  goe  to  prissoune  with  Johne  Pater- 
soune  off  and  y  to  remaine  whill  that  be  payit. 

The  said  day  ordaines  the  collector  to  pay  to  James  Frank  the  sowme  Warrand. 
of  ten  punds  qlk  w'  eight  pund  allowed  to  himself  for  the  muskat  he  should 
have  payit  in  to  the  hospitall  and  some  moneys  he  got  of  befoir  compleits  to 
him  threttie  sex  pund  ten  shilhng  deburst  be  him  for  drugs  and  wther  medica- 
ments he  waired  out  in  cureing  of  Ax^  Bischopes  leg  qlk  was  concludit  to  have 
bein  cutted  aff. 

Vigesimo  qiiinto  Maij  1661. 

The  whilk  day  the  deacon  conveiner  deacones  of  crafts  and  their  counsell  Wamnd. 
being  conveined  ordanes  the  coUecto''  to  deburs  to  Walter  Neilsoune  to  be 
given  to  Ro'  Vrie  for  his  attendance  in  the  trads  busines  twentie    shilling 
starling. 

The  sd  day  vnlawes  W"'  Glen  flesho""  in  four  marks  for  the  wronge  and  Glen  vniawit. 
disobedience  done  be  him  to  the  deacon  cyforme  to  the  twa  decreits  given  out 
yanent  to  be  pntlie  payit  to  the  collecto''  of    the  flesho''s  and  to  give  satis- 
factioune  to  the  deacon. 

The  sd  day  ordaines  the  collecto''  to  give  to  Ro'  Adame  officiar  fyftine  Warrand. 
shilling  starling  for  the  supplie  of  his  wyfe  lying  seek. 


372  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.         [1661 

Act  non  to  The  Same  day  report  being  made  that  the  magrats  had  regraitit  that  there 

anent  maters    wer  now  befor  them  som  triviall  maters  belonging  to  the  treds  onlie  it  was 

to  the'^'^'^^ ''"'  therfor  vnanimuslie  statut  and  ordained  by  all  pnt  that  q'somever  craftisman 

deacones.  trubles  any  of  ye  magrats  \vt  complents  meirlie  belonging  to  the  treds  q'' 

first  he  acquant  ye  deacon  of  his  calhng  or  then  the  deacon  conveiner  and 

deacones  yanent  that  y'  persone  in  no  tyme  comeing  sail  beir  no  office  amongs 

the  trads  nor  in  the  deacon  conveiners  hous  and  yis  is  \v*out  prejudice  of  ony 

persone  to  complein  for  civill  causs  civill  debtis  streking  and  bloods. 

Sexto  August]  1661. 

Kings  letters  The  qlk  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  deacones  of  craftis  and  their  counsell 

and  ane  bend,  being  conveined  Walter  Neilsoune  producit  the  thrie  letters  grantit  be  King 

James  the  Sext  and  fra  King  Charles  the  First  with  some  vther  papers  w* 

them  qlks  wer  put  in  the  box  as  also  ane  rid  bend. 

Audito's  The  sd  day  appoynts  the  deacon  of  everie  tred  who  hes  intres  of    the 

comp^  "^^^       Gorballes  to  meit  and  to  heir  the  collecto'"s  compt  theranent  and  appoynts 

Baillie  Ker  deacon  cjrveiner  and  Walter  Neilsoune  to  meit  also  w'  y'"  for  ye 

hous  intres. 

The  sd  day  appoynts  Bailhe  Ker  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  \\' alter  Neilsoune 
to  speik  w'  ye  prifill  of  ye  college  anent  Jo°  Lies  sone. 

Jafray.  The  sd  day  ordaines  the  deacon  of    the  hamermen  to  con  vein  his  key 

mi's  and  to  bring  their  craftis  box  w'  them  y'  ye  same  may  be  opened  that  the 
act  set  doune  in  their  book  ag'  Alex''  Jafray  may  be  deleft  and  scored  out 
conforme  to  the  former  ordo^. 

Lyll  warrand.  In  anser  to  the  supphca~une  given  in  be  Androw  Lyll  ordaines  his  band 

of  fourtie  pundis  be  given  bak  to  him  in  respect  the  same  is  payit  be  making 
of  clothes  to  the  poor  in  the  hospitall  and  farder  ordaines  the  collecto"^  to  give 
him  fourtie  marks  for  his  suplie. 

Hill.  The  same  day  ordaines  Cuthbert  Grege  deacon  of  coupers  to  pay  to  Jonet 

Hill  ane  weadow  of  y*  calling  the  double  of  what  shoe  sail  be  fund  to  want 
of  her  former  cavilles  in  respect  he  hes  given  no  obedience  to  their  former 
acts  and  this  to  be  done  be  sight  of  the  deacon  conveiner  the  visito''  of  maltmen 
and  W"  Boyd. 

Grege  and  The  Same  day  appoynts  Cuthbert  Grege  deacon  of  cowpers  to  give  bak 

PoUokm'sto    ^Q  ^ym  Poliok  the  ten  marks  they  took  aff  him  for  sending  of   his   prenteis 

prenteiss  abroad  for  service  of  ye  countrie  to  win  his  living  and   help  his  m''  and   its 

declared  be  the  haill  melting  that  it  sail  be  leasome  to  ony  m''  of  ony  calling 

to  send  his  prenteis  abroad  q"  ever  he  pleases  to  seek  his  awine  mentienence 

and  supphe  his  m^  the  m''  acknouledgmg  his  craft  w'  ony  little  thing. 


i66i] 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


373 


cyvemer. 


Nono  Ociobris  1661. 
The  qlk  day  Manasscs  Lyll  deacon  conveiner  with  the  deacones  of  crafts  Lyt  deacon 
new  and  old  and  their  bretherin  of  counsell  being  conveined  in  the  craftis 
hospitall  for  electing  of  twa  of  their  number  to  be  pntit  w'  ye  sd  Manasses 
Lyll  pnt  deacon  cyveiner  to  the  provest  baillies  and  counsell  of  this  burgh 
this  day  to  the  effect  y'  on  of  y""  may  be  electit  and  choysen  to  bear  office  as 
deacon  cyveiner  of  this  burgh  for  the  year  enshewing  be  pluralitie  of  vots 
theis  persones  fallowing  wer  electit  and  choysen  to  be  pntit  w'  ye  sd  pnt  deacon 
cyveiner  to  the  effect  forsd  viz  Walter  Neilsoune  maltman  and  Ro'  Canithers 
tailzco^  and  ordaines  this  lyt  to  be  pntit  be  Niniane  Andersoune  malt,  and 
Alex''  Jafray  hafiierman. 

The  same  day  therafter  the  sd  Manasses  Lyll  was  conteinowed  deacon  Lyll  deacon 
cyveiner  of  this  burgh  for  ane  year  to  cum. 

Decimo  Ociobris  1661. 
The  whilk  day  Manasses  Lyll  the  new  electit  deacon  conveiner  made  choyse 
of  ye  persones  fallowing  to  be  on  his  counsell  for  a  year  to  com. 


conveiner. 


Alex""  Goveane 

Johne 

Watsoune  visito'' 

Robert  Boyd 

James 

Selkrige 

James  Mitchell 

Mathow  Cumyng 

James  Robesoune  yC 

James 

Andersoune 

Jo" 

'  Falconer 

George 

;  Broome 

W"  Boyd 

Jo"  Walker 

James  Frank 

Androw 

Moodie  baillie 

Hamermen 

Jo°  Maxwell 

Maltmen 

W"i  Neilsoune 

Ro'  Wilsoune 

Thomas  Campbell 

Jo"  Leiper 

Patrick  Bryce 

Patrick  M^^Ilviker 

Niniane  Andersoune 

Harie  Watt 

Jo"  Miller 

Tailyeo''s 

Johne  Ker 

Wrights 

Gabriell  Cumyng 

Jo"  Bisket 

W""  Reid 

Ro'  Caruthers 

Jo°  Miller  tailyeo'' 

Skinners 

George  Clark 

VV"  Jonstoune 

W"  Hunter 

Cordoners 

Jo"  Listoune  yo'' 

Coupers 

Cuthbert  Grege 

Gabriell  Corbett 

W"  Scheilles 

James  Waddrop 

W™  Coats 

Flesho's 

Ro*  Brom 

Ard  Andersoune 

Alexf  Hoknes 

374 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1661 


Baxters 


Weavers 


Jleasounes 


James  Robesoune  elder     Bonetmakers  Androw    Jape    for    ye 
Daniell  Purdoune  bonetmakers 


Archibald  Glen 
Patrick  Brjce 
Michael  Watsoune 

Johne  Clark 
Rot  Bovd 


Litsters  Jo°  Lindsay 

Georg  Findlay 

Gaimers  James  Dougall 

Androw  Ralstoune 


Chirurgianes  Daniell  Broune 

Whilks  haill  persones  abovenamed  compeired  acceptit  and  gave  y''  oathes 
as  vse  is  except  theis  persones  who  wer  absent  viz  Jo"  Ker  Jo"  Maxwell  Ro' 
Wilsoune  Jo"  Leiper  Jo"  Listoun  Gabriell  Corbett  Av'^  Glen  Michael  Watsoune 
James  Robesoune  elder  Ar'^  Andersoune  Jo"  Miller  tailyeo""  W™  Neilsoun 
Thomas  Campbell  Jo"  Clark  Mathow  Cumyng  Patrick  Bryce  weaver  Jo" 
Lindsay  Ro'  Broome  James  Frank  Daniell  Broune  George  Findlay  Alex' 
Holmes. 

Four  of  the  The  sd  day  the  forsds  haill  persones  on  counsell  being  lytted  for  choysing 

deaneof  riids    °^*-  °^  ^°^^  °^  their  number  to  sit  on  the  deane  of  gilds  counsell  for  ane  year 

counsell.  to  com  theis  persones  fallowing  wer  electit  and  choysen  be  plurahtie  of  vots  to 

the  effect  forsaid  viz  Jo"  Ker  Jo"  Miller  taih-eo""  W""  Boyd  and  George  Clark. 

Neilsoune.  The  Same  day  the  forsaid  deacon  cy\-einer  with  the  haill  persones  forsd 

\\ho  wer  pnt  all  in  ane  vo\'ce  made  choyse  of  Walter  Neilsoune  to  be  ane 
e.xtraordinar  counsellor'  on  the  deacon  cj'veiners  counsell  for  ane  year  to  com 
who  pnt  did  accept  and  gave  his  oath  as  vse  is. 

Qiiinto  Novembris  1661. 

The  qlk  day  Mannass  Lyll  deacon  conviner  w'  the  deacones  of  crafts  and 
ther  bretherine  of  counsell  being  conveined  wha  for  the  most  pairt  wer  present 
David  Robesoune  who  was  collector  for  y^  preceiding  zeir  gave  in  his  compt 
of  his  haill  intromissioune  w'  the  hospitalls  rents  this  last  zeir  q^oi  chairge 
and  discherge  is  as  followes. 

Chairge. 
In  the  first  he  chairges  himself  w'  the  soume  fallouing  reccivit  be 

him  frae  Ro'  Marshell  this  last  zeir  of  burges  silver  .       40     o     o 

Item  he  chairges  himself  w'  the  soume  fallouing  receivit  be  him 

frae  ye  last  coUecto''  that  was  restand  in  his  hands  at  the 

closing  of  his  last  compt  .....  354  5  4 
Item  he  chairges  himself  w*  the  haill  qrter  compts  receivit  be  him 

frae  the  deacones,  the  litsters  cxccptit        .  .  .     207    6     5 


i66i]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  375 

Itc  for  the  Gorball  rent  the  crope  i56o  ....  244  o  o 
Item  frae  Jo"  Barr  for  the  an  rent  of  ane  hundreth  punds  frae 

Candlemes  1655  to  Lambmes  1660    .  .  .  .       33     o     o 

Item  frae  Johne  Colhoune  for  the  an  rent  of  ane  thousand  mrks 

frae  Mertimes  1659  to  Mertimes  1660  .  .  .       40    o    o 

Item  receivit  frae  Willeame  Coates  for  aii  rent  of  fyve  hundereth 

mrks  the  sd  zeir         .  .  .  .  .  .       20    o    o 

Item  receivit  be  him  frae  W"*  Andersone  for  the  aii  rent  of  fyve 

hundereth  mrks  frae  Witsounday  1660  to  Witsonday  1661  20  o  o 
Item  receavit  frae  Johne  Miller  for  the  afi  rent  of  fyve  hundereth 

mrks  frae  Witsonday  1658  to  Witsonday  1660         .  .       32     o    o 

Item  frae  the  tennents  of  wmqll  James  Duncans  land  of  maill  frae 

Mertimes   1659    to   Witsonday    1661    four   pund   x  s.    being 

rebaitit   that   was   deburst   upon   repairing   of   the   windous 

therof  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       61  10    o 

Item  receivit  frae  Johne  Bomanno  that  he  was  awand  be  band  80  o  o 
Item  frae  Gabriell  Cumyng  wright  in  pairt  payment  of  ane  mair 

soume  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       26  13     4 

Item  frae  Allane  Andersoune  off""  in  pairt  pay'  of  the  few  dewties 

conteined  in  the  rentall        .  .  .  .  .       iS    o    o 

Item   frae   Johne   Birscat   Johne   Clark   James   Hunter   Niniane 

Andersone   Andrew   Ralstoune   James   Frank   Jo"    Listoune 

W"'  Goveane  and  Jo"  Maxuall  ilk  ane  of  y™  eight  pund    inde      72    o    o 

Suiiia  of  tlie  wholl  chairge  is 

ane  thousand   twa  hundereth   fourtie  eight   punds   fyftine 
shilhng  four  pennies. 


Dischearge. 

In  the  first  deburst  to  Johne  Ker  qlk  he  had  formerlie  deburst  to 

David  Spens  and  was  oinittit  in  his  last  compt  .  .300 

Item  deburst  to  James  Braidwood  for  wrytting  some  of  the  gildrie  140 
Item  to  sex  poor  men  in  the  hous  for  ther  pensioune  the  haill  yeir  288  o  o 
Mair  for  cloth  to  the  sd  men       .  .  .  .  .       44  12     8 

Item  deburst  for  furnishing  of  lynings  buttones  cullored  threid 

poutches  and  the  making  of  them    .  .  .  .       12  17     o 

Item  for  shirts  and  shoes  .  .  .  .  .       26  17     8 

Item  for  elding  such  as  peits  and  coalles  .  .  .       16  10     o 

Item  to  the  ordinarie  pensionars  for  ane  vvhoU  zeir  at  twelfe  pund 

the    moneth 
Item  to  David  Mitchell  befor  his  admissioune 


.     144    o    o 
or  twa  moneths      20    8     0 
Item  at  Halloumes  court  to  the  supplicants  conforme  to  ordour      27  16     o 


376 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1661 


Item  to  Hector  Stewart  conforme  to  ordo^  for  service 

Item  to  Ro'  Adame  officair  for  his  help    ... 

Item  to  Robert  Caruthers  to  defray  his  chairges  in  Edinburgh 

being  sent  be  the  deacones 
M''  at  his  retume  out  y^oi  8  dollors  extending  to 
Item  for  dressing  the  hospitall  windous 

Item  for  ane  chist  and  ane  winding  scheit  to  James  Litlejo". 
Item  for  ane  roiill  to  the  hiegh  chymney  and  ane  brig  to  the  laigh 

ane  w'  ane  new  back  .... 

Item  at  comand  to  ane  poor  minster 
Item  conforme  to  ordour  to  Thomas  Dunrumple  and  Katherine 

Salmound  ..... 

Item  of  chairges  wpon  Johne  Bars  band 
Item  to  ane  distressed  sojor  confonne  to  ordour    . 
Item  for  dressing  the  drum  w'  some  new  lossans  mending 
Item  at  Beltane  court  to  the  supplicants 
Item  to  James  Frank  conforme  to  ordour 
Item  sent    to    Edinburgh  to  Ro'  Wrie  xij  ll  and    to    bear  the 

coiTiissiones   chairges  .... 

Item  to  the  clerk  for  his  fiell       .... 
Item  to  ane  poor  women  .... 

Item  to  ane  distressed  man  Capt  Gordone 
Item  to  vmqle  Gabriell  Cunynghames  reUct 
Item  at  Lambmes  court  to  the  supplicants 
Item  to  Andrew  Lyll  conforme  to  ordo"' 
Item  to  Ro'  Adam  for  ane  hatt 
Item  to  help  to  mend  his  shoone 
Item  w'  Doctor  Crichtoune  q°  he  went  to  Londone 
Item  ther  is  to  be  rebaitit  aff  the  compter  the  soume  fallowing 

for  the  pryce  of  allevine  pecks  of  bear  that  he  chairged  himse! 

w'  and  qlk  was  given  doune  to  the  taksmen  of  the  Gorballes 

to  move  y">  to  subscryve  ther  tacks  extending  to 
Item  for  poynting  of  the  back  heigh  window     inde 


16  0 

0 

13  6 

8 

72  0 

0 

23  4 

0 

3  10 

8 

4  16 

0 

5  10 

8 

0  12 

0 

16  0 

0 

0  12 

0 

3  0 

0 

3  18 

8 

23  14 

0 

18  0 

0 

24  0 

0 

20  0 

0 

9  0 

0 

I  16 

0 

8  10 

0 

16  7 

0 

26  13 

4 

8  0 

0 

0  17 

0 

I  3 

0 

4  16    o 
060 


Surha  of  the  dischearge  is 

aught  hundercth  four  scoir  threttin  pund  fyftine  shilling. 
And  sua  chairge  and  dischearg  being  compeared  ther  restit 
in  the  compters  hand  thrie  hundereth  fyftie  fyve  punds. 


The  qlk  compt  befoir  wr*ein  being  at  lenth  red  calculated  and  layd  was 
ratifeid  and  appro\-ine  and  haill  artickles  therof  and  the  forsd  thrie  hundereth 
fyftie  fyve  pund  being  paj'it  be  ye  sd  David  they  exonerit  him  accordinghe. 


i662]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  377 

The  same  day  be  pluralitie  of  vottes  David  Robesoune  was  continouit  Monyc 
collector  for  the  yeir  to  come  wha  did  accept  and  give  his  oth  as  vse  is  and 
becaus  the  sd  thrie  hundereth  fyftie  fyve  pund  is  left  in  his  hands  ordaines  him 
to  be  chairgit  y'w'  at  the  making  of  his  nixt  compt  and  w'  threttie  sex  pund 
scots  reccvit  be  him  this  last  yeir  frae  George  Clark  of  burges  silver. 

The  same  day  the  collector  producit  Jo"  Bars  band  wmqll  George  Lyounes  Bands  put  in 
band  Silvertounhilles  band  and  Jonet  Cunynghames  discherge  qlks  wer  all 
put  in  the  box  and  ordaines  him  to  put  Whytsyds  band  to  executioune. 

The  sd  day  in  anser  to  the  supplica^une  given  in  be  Jo"  Grier  craving  Warrand. 
satisfactioune  for  some  bygaine  service  done  to  the  hous  in  bygaine  tymes 
ordaines  David  Robesoune  collecto''  to  pay  to  him  nyne  punds  scots. 

Septimo  Feb'''  1662. 

The  same  day  it  is  ordainit  that  ilk  deacon  of  every  craft  who  is  not  reddy  Anent  the 
to  pay  ther  qrter  compts  to  the  collecto''s  at  the  four  ordinarie  meltings  as  it  compts?"^ 
was  in  vse  of  befoir  sail  pay  the  doublle  yof  w'out  any  delay. 

The  same  day  in  respect  tlier  ar  thrie  poor  indigent  boyes  seiking  to  gait 
the  place  of  bursurrie  now  at  ye  hous  presenta'une  and  seing  they  ar  all 
indigent  and  to  gait  y"  helpit  ther  ar  sindrie  sowmes  promeist  to  gait  y'"  all 
setled  and  sustenit  whill  God  provyd  better  qlk  if  they  prefer  on  befoir  another 
it  is  feired  that  qlk  is  promeist  sail  not  be  so  thankfuUie  payit  as  is  pmeist  and 
yfor  it  is  thought  good  to  delay  the  presenta^une  of  any  of  y™  whill  the  moey 
promeist  be  secured  and  for  securing  yof  hes  named  thes  psones  to  wit  Thomas 
Campbell  Johne  Ker  Walter  Neilson  Jo"  Falconer  Niniane  Andersoune  Ro' 
Boyd  and  James  Mitchell  Alex''  Goveane  and  Jo"  Watsoune  to  goe  about  to 
setell  and  secur  that  qlk  is  promeist  and  y"  every  man  to  have  his  frie  voit 
qlk  of  the  thrie  sail  be  presentit. 

The  same  day  ordaines  the  collector  to  deburs  ten  mk  for  helping  to  put  Warrand 
ane  sone  of  vmqll  Jo"  Watsones  tailyor  to  ane  craft.  coUectc. 

xiij  Feb"'  1662. 

This  day  it  is  enactit  that  it  sail  not  be  leasome  to  any  burges  gratis  to  No  burges 
accept  of  ane  prenteis  heirafter  and  y'  all  prenteises  be  booked  in  the  deacon  a'^prenteis.^ 
conveiners  bulk  w'in  fyftine  dayes  after  the  doune  setting  of  ye  indenter  and 
y'  the  m''  y"  produce  his  burges  tikit. 

Decimo  quinto  Feb"'  1662. 

Mannass  Lyll   deacon  conviner  and  Johne  Ker  being  appoyntit    to  fit  Memorandwin. 
compts  w*  the  meassouns  and  in  what  they  want  of  ther  p*  of  the  Gorball 
rent  for  the  crops  1656  1657  ''■^5^  ^nd  1659  and  they  finding  that  Alex^  Danizell 


378  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1662 

the  tyme  he  was  collector  had  chargit  himself  \v*  sextine  punds  qlk  he  should 
have  receavit  frae  John  Clerk  and  Jo"  Hunter  deacones  of  the  maissounes  for 
ye  twa  muskats  qlk  he  never  receavit  from  y""  but  deteaned  the  same  of  y 
p'  of  the  Gorball  rent  moey  and  yet  the  haill  frie  monye  the  sd  Alex''  had  at  ye 
making  of  his  compt  was  dely\-erit  to  David  Robesoune  now  collector  and 
yfoir  the  sds  audito''s  finds  it  convenient  that  ye  sd  David  give  the  sd  sextin 
punds  and  3'e  samy  to  be  allo\\it  to  him  at  his  compt  making. 

Priino  Maij  1662. 

Decreitiu  The  qlk  day  JIannass  Lyll  deacon  conviner  w'  the  deacons  of  crafts  wha 

Patricif  ^"'  '^'i^  most  p'  wer  present  as  alsoe  divers  and  sindrie  psones  of  the  sd  deacon 

M'Vicker.  convincrs  counsell  being  conveined  anent  the  complent  given  in  be  Patrick 
M'^'Ilvicker  hamermen  burges  of  y^  bur*  against  Alexander  Goveane  present 
deacon  of  hamermen  within  the  samyne  mackand  mentioune  that  q""  the  calhng 
of  the  hamermen  tred  does  consist  of  man  3'e  and  divers  occupa^unes  as  gold- 
smx'thes  bras  smj-ths  black  smythes  peutherers  saidlers  and  many  wthers 
the  Ij-k  and  j-et  hes  bein  the  vse  and  custome  of  ye  sd  calhng  this  lang  tyme 
b^-gane  past  memorie  of  man  (as  can  be  sufficiently  made  appeir  be  serall 
instances)  that  q'somevir  frieman  of  the  sd  hamennan  tred  can  begin  any 
peice  of  wark  of  any  pendicle  of  ye  sd  tred  and  outred  the  samy  pfeithe  that 
he  hes  bein  Ucentiat  to  mak  that  work  of  q'so^""  sort  it  sould  be  of  and  wpon 
considera'une  qi'of  the  sd  Patrick  compleiner  taking  to  his  considera*  une 
the  great  loass  and  prejudices  susteined  by  himself  and  sindrie  wther  inhabi- 
tants of  y^  burgh  by  sendmg  away  to  Ed""  ther  haill  old  tin  and  peuther  paying 
great  chairges  for  the  cariage  yof  and  renewing  of  the  samyne  qlk  might  have 
bein  made  vse  of  heir  amongst  the  croftsmen  within  y^  bur'  to  ther  awine  great 
good  and  comoditie  and  the  sd  Patrick  compleiner  ha\'ing  atteined  to  the 
skill  and  knowledge  of  the  pewtherer  tred  in  casting  of  plaits  qlk  is  ane  pendicle 
of  ve  sd  hamerman  tred  and  is  aiblle  to  begin  ane  peice  of  wark  of  \'*  sort  and 
to  outred  ye  samy  sufficientlie  and  to  his  great  chairges  and  expenss  halving 
hyred  ane  weill  expert  servant  trained  up  at  London  to  be  ane  servant  to 
him  trew  it  is  the  sd  Alex""  Goveane  deacon  of  ye  sd  tred  hes  most  vnjusthe 
fyned  the  sd  Patrick  in  twenti  punds  for  ye  samyne  be  himself  with  consent 
of  tua  or  thrie  breyrin  of  tred  onhe  and  above  twentie  being  pnt  and  sicklyk 
hes  set  doune  ane  act  wpon  ye  compleiner  wnder  the  paine  of  ane  great  souTne 
that  he  should  hyr  no  servant  for  service  making  to  him  cravand  yfoir  the  sd 
deacon  conviner  and  deacons  of  crafts  to  tak  ye  premiss  to  y  most  W3'se 
considera"une  and  to  considder  the  great  coihodity  and  proffeit  may  redound 
to  the  tredsmen  within  y^  bur'  who  will  indevour  to  work  y'  work  y^'selves 
as  working  of  pewther  qlk  they  wer  necessitat  to  bring  afar  of  to  ther  great 
chairges  as  is  abovewrytten  as  in  the  sd  bill  of  complent  at  mair  lenth  is 
conteincd  qlk  being  called  the  sd  Patrick  compleiner  and  the  abovenamed 


i662]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  379 

Alex'  defender  compcirand  botli  psonallie.  The  reassouns  and  allega*unes 
of  both  p'ies  being  at  lenth  hard  and  considered  be  the  said  deacon  conviner 
and  deacons  of  crafts  and  it  being  openhe  asserted  and  affirmed  be  the  sd 
Patrick  compleiner  that  q'  he  intendit  to  work  of  ye  sd  peutherer  tred  in 
casting  of  pewther  he  \v'  great  paines  and  Industrie  atteined  to  the  knawledge 
yof  as  to  begin  and  compleit  the  samyne  sufficienthe  and  qlk  was  assertit  to 
be  trew  by  serall  of  thes  who  wer  present  and  it  being  vrged  be  the  sd  Alex"" 
Goveane  that  the  sd  Patrick  might  mak  ane  new  sey  and  receave  for  y'  effect 
new  sey  m's  from  the  tred  and  both  p*ies  yin  being  removit  befoir  sentance 
or  interloquito''  efter  much  reassoning  of  the  mater  to  and  againe  and  efter 
matuir  advjce  and  dehbera'une  had  yanent  it  was  fund  be  the  sd  deacon 
con\'iner  haill  deacons  and  wthers  present  that  it  was  not  the  p*  of  any  frieman 
of  ane  calling  having  once  given  in  his  sej'  and  accordingUe  admittit  to  be 
subject  either  to  receive  from  the  calhng  new  sey  m^'s  or  to  give  in  ane  new 
sey  albeit  he  be  his  paines  and  industrie  atteined  to  greater  knawledge  of  such 
p'icuUers  and  pendicles  of  ye  calling  wherin  he  was  first  admittit  ane  frieman 
and  alsoe  it  was  fund  be  the  sd  deacon  conviner  and  deacons  of  crafts  and 
wthers  present  that  a  frieman  of  any  calling  may  mak  any  peice  of  wark 
belonging  to  his  sd  croft  or  pendicle  y'^oi  and  to  fie  servands  for  serving  of  him 
yin  proN'yding  he  can  both  begin  and  outred  the  sd  peice  of  work  himself  and 
that  conforme  to  the  verdicts  given  out  of  befoir  be  the  magrats  and  counsell 
of  y^  bur'  in  the  lyk  maters  and  the  cornoune  practis  observit  amoung  the  sd 
hamennen  y^selves  heirtofoir  in  the  lyk  p'icuUers  and  y*-  the  sd  Patrick  might 
fallow  through  his  intentioune  and  if  he  failzie  according  to  his  wndertaking 
recomends  to  the  deacon  of  ye  sd  Iramermen  tred  and  m''s  of  ye  calling  to  tak 
tryel  yof  once  weiklie  or  offer  as  they  pleas  and  to  confiscat  such  wark  to  be 
made  be  the  sd  Patrick  for  the  vse  of  the  poor  as  they  sail  cleirly  mak  appeir 
to  be  \nsufficienthe  made. 

Decimo  tertio  Maij  1662. 

The  same  day  the  deacon  conviner  deacones  of  crafts  and  ther  bretherin  Goveane. 
of  counsell  being  conveined  wha  for  the  most  pairt  wer  present  it  being 
inquyred  of  them  to  q™  the  mater  was  remittit  concerning  the  deacon  of  the 
hamermen  anent  his  giving  satisfactioune  to  the  deacon  conviner  for  his  fault 
confessed  of  befor  it  was  said  pubhctlie  be  the  sd  deacon  of  hamermen  that 
he  had  done  noe  wrang  nether  that  he  confest  the  same  and  soe  he  would 
mak  noe  amends  and  againe  it  being  verefeid  be  thes  present  that  the  sd 
deacon  of  hamermen  did  confcs  ane  wrang  and  cam  in  wiU  and  efter  he  was 
removit  and  called  in  againe  he  declairit  that  he  would  give  satisfactioune  to 
the  deacon  conviner  at  his  awin  sicht  befor  twa  or  thrie  honest  men  and  the 
bretherin  present  appoyntit  BailUe  Moodie  Walter  Neilson  Jo"  Ker  Thomas 
Campbell  and  such  of  the  deacones  as  pleases  y"  to  tak  w'  j'™  to  sie  the  samy 
done  w'  dilligence. 


38o 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1662 


Recomends  to  Thomas  Campbell  and  Patrick  Brjxe  maltmen  to  speik 
the  counsell  anent  the  thrie  poor  boyes  wha  ar  seiking  to  be  bursarres. 

Nono  Jidij  1662. 
Venter  daiUes.  The  same  day  it  is  concludit  to  deall  the  dailies  the  morne  w'  the  merchands 

and  to  deill  the  samy  againe  amongst  y™selves  upon  Saturday  nixt. 

il'llvicker.  The  same  day  Alex''  Govean  deacon  of    the  hamermen  being  carping 

against  the  decreit  given  out  wpon  the  first  of  Maij  last  in  favor's  of  Patrick 
^Kllvikar  hamerman  qlk  decreit  being  red  pubhcthe  the  samy  was  ratified  and 
approvin  in  the  haill  heids  and  articles  yin  conteined  be  ye  sd  deacon  conviner 
deacones  of  crafts  and  haill  breyrin  pnt. 

Goveane  to  The  Same  day  ordaines  the  deacon  of  the  hamermen  to  pay  back  agane 

p^ores^monye.  ^^  ^^^  poores  boxe  the  ten  shiUing  sterling  they  took  out  yof  wxangousUe  and 

gave  to  a  man  that  Patrick  Jl'Ilvicker  had  fied  to  caus  him  divert  lais  service 

and  put  him  aff  y&  tred. 


King. 


Compt 
Robesoune. 


Poor  supplie. 


Compt 
Gorball  rent. 


Anent 

Mitchell  and 
Andersounes 
gildrie  fj-ne. 


Undecimo  August  1662. 
The  sd  day  ordaines  the  collecto''  to  caus  put  Johne  Colhounes  band  q'in 
Androw  King  is  can''  to  dew  executioune  w'  all  dilhgence. 

The  same  day  appoynts  Bailhe  iloodie  Walter  Neilsoune  Johne  Ker 
Thomas  Campbell  the  deacon  of  the  taityeo'^s  the  visito''  of  maltmen  to  be 
warned  to  conveine  w'  David  Robesoun  for  heiring  of  David  Robesounes 
compt  anent  the  Gorball  rent  for  the  last  cropt  and  to  mak  report  yanent  ye 
nixt  melting. 

The  same  day  the  hamermen  having  given  in  eight  billes  and  the  skinners 
als  many  seeking  supplie  and  ye  hous  no'  being  able  to  anser  all  becaus  there 
wer  sundrie  of  \\y^  calhngs  to  be  helped  ordaines  the  collecto''  to  pay  to  each 
of  ye  deacones  of  hamermen  and  skinners  ten  marks  for  supplie  of  theris 
repve  poor. 

Vigesimo  nono  August]  1662. 

The  same  day  report  was  made  be  the  deacon  conviner  for  himself  and 
in  name  of  thes  who  ar  appojmtit  to  heir  David  Robesounes  compt  of  the 
Gorball  rent  1661  that  all  being  comptit  by  ther  was  to  be  payit  in  be  the 
sd  David  Robesoune  for  the  an  well  of  ilk  thowsand  merks  of  stock  fyftie 
four  merks  sex  shilling  eight  pennies  and  the  hous  pairt  y''of  is  (  ). 

The  same  day  ordaines  Walter  Neilsoune  Thomas  Campbell  the  deacon 
of  the  tailyo''s  and  visitor  of  maltmen  to  settle  w'  James  Mitchell  cordoner 
and  James  Andersoune  couper  anent  the  paying  of  ther  gildrie  fynes  and 
trye  out  amongs  the  treds  who  ar  not  gild  britlier  and  not  ablle  to  doe  ye  samy 
and  to  speik  y"'  y''anent  and  to  give  in  ther  names. 


i662]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


^.8i 


The  same  day  it  is  concludit  that  none  be  admittit  ane  member  of  the  Non  to  be 

■'  member  of  the 

hous  but  such  as  ar  gild  brether.  bous  but  gild 

brether. 

The  same  day  the  hospitalls  seasing  of  vmqll  James  Duncans  land  was  Seising  put  in 
put  in  the  boxe. 

The  same  day  in  answer  to  the  supplica'une  given  in  be  Johne  Falconer  p»-fsenta-une 
sone  lauU  to  vmqll  James  Falconer  ther  is  grantit  to  him  ane  vacand  place  of 
bursarrie  in  the  colledge  at  ther  gift  and  presenta'une  for  four  yeir  to  come. 

Octavo  Odohris  1662. 

Tlie  qlk  day  the  persones  fallowing  viz  Walter  Neilsoune  Johne  Miller 
deacon  of  tailyo''s  and  Ro*  Caruthers  wer  electit  be  pluralitie  of  wots  to  be 
presentit  to  the  provest  baillies  and  counsell  of  y^  burgh  to  the  effect  y'  ane  of 
y™  may  be  choysen  to  bear  office  as  deacon  conviner  for  the  year  to  come. 


Therefter  the  said  Johne  Miller  was  electit  deacon  conviner. 

Nono  Oclobris  1662. 

Fallowes  the  names  of  thes  who  ar  appoyntit  to  be  on  the  deacon  con- 
viners  counsell  for  the  yeir  enshewing. 


Miller  deacon 
conviner. 


Deacones 


Johne  Leiper 
Jo°  Miller 
James  Mitchell 
W™  Glen 
Johne  Falconer 
Johne  Clark 
James  Thomesone 


Johne  Watsoune  visitor 
Thomas  Miller 
George  Clark 
James  Andersoune 
Michael  Gilmour 
Joline  Walker 


James  Colhoun  baillie 

Hemermen      Alexander  Goveane  Maltmen 

Robert  Wilsoune 
David  Robesoune 
Patrick  M^Ilvicker 
Harie  Watt 

Tailyeo^s         Johne  Ker  Wrights 

Robert  Boyd 
Ro*  Caruthers 
Johne  Birsket 
James  Davidsoune  Skinners 


Androw  Moodie 
W"  Neilsoune 
Walter  Neilsoune 
Thomas  Campbell 
Patrick  Bryce 

James  Selkrig  wright 
Alex''  Eglintoune 


Mannass  Lyll 
Mathew  Cumyng 


382 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1662 


Purdoun 
coUecto'. 


Cordoners       W™  Coats 

Gabriell  Corbet 
Rot  RusseU 
James  Waddiop 
Ro'  Findlay 

Baxters  James  Robesoune  yo' 

Daniel  Purdoune 

Waivers  Archebald  Glen 

Patrick  Biyce 
Alex''  Younger 

Meassounes     W™  Boyd 

Rot  Boyd  yof 

Chirurgianes  (  ) 


Coupers 


Flesho^'s 


Robert  Snyp 
Cuthbert  Greg 


George  Broome 
Alexr  Holmes 


Bonnetmakers  Niniane  Spence 


Johne  Lindsay 
Thomas  Lining  litsters 

George  Ralstoune 
James  Dougall  gaimers 


The  same  day  all  thir  psones  being  present  gave  ther  oathes  as  vse  is  and 
the  sd  Daniell  Purdoune  was  electit  collecto"'  and  did  accept  and  give  his  othe. 

Septimo  Novembris  1662. 
The  same  day  David  Robesoune  lait  collecto''  made  his  compt  of    his 
intromissioune  \vt  the  hospitalls  rent  y^  last  zear  q'of  chairge  and  dischairge 
is  as  fallowes  and  first  the 

Chairge. 

In  the  first  he  chairges  himself  w*  ye  sowme  fallouing  that  was 
restand  in  his  hand  at  the  making  of  his  last  compt  extending 
to      .......  . 

Item  he  chairges  himself  wt  3-e  sowme  fallouing  receavit  be  him 
frae  George  Clerk  in  name  of  burges  silver    . 

Item  he  chairges  himself  w'  ye  so\\Tne  fallouing  receavit  be  him  frae 
Ro'  Adame  as  a  pt  of  the  monyes  coUectit  be  him  conform 
to   ye   rentall  ...... 

Item  fra  AUane  Andersoune  in  ye  lyk     .... 

Item  receavit  of  maill  from  Alex''  Flyming  as  ane  of  the  tennents 
now  in  James  Duncans  land  frae  ^^'itsonday  1661  to 
W'itsonday  1662        ...... 

Item  frae  Gabriell  Cumyng  as  restand  of  his  gildiie  fyne 

Item  frae  Jo^  Bar  skinner  for  the  aii  rent  of  the  hundereth  punds 
he  is  awand  to  ye  hospitall  frae  Candlmes  1661  to  Lamas 
1662  ....... 


355 


36 


100 

0 

0 

12 

0 

0 

18 

0 

0 

26 

13 

4 

i662l        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


383 


6 
13 


Item  frae  W"  Coats  for  the  an  rent  of  fyve  hundereth  merks  frae 

Mertimes  1660  to  Mertimes  1661       .  .  .  .       20    o    o 

Item  frae  W"  Andersoune  for  the  an  rent  of  wther  fyve  hundereth 

merks  frae  Witsonday  1661  to  W'itsonday  1662        .  .       20    o     o 

Item  frae  Androw  King  for  the  an  rent  of  ane  thowsand  merks  y' 
was  awand  be  Johne  Colhoune  frae  Mertimes  1660  to  Mer- 
times  1661  .  .  .  .  .  .       40    o    o 

Item  receivit  frae  ye  haill  deacones  of  quarter  compts  the  Utster 

exceptit         .......     206 

Item  for  the  hospitalls  p'  of  the  Gorball  rent  for  the  crop  1661     290 

Item  frae  Alex""  Goveane  for  the  ah  rent  of  ane  hundereth  merks 

from  Witsonday  1661  to  Witsonday  1662     .  .  .400 

Item  fra  the  aught  lait  deacones  for  ther  swords  ilk  ane  of  y"' 

eight   pund       inde  .  .  .  .  .       64     o     o 

Summa  of  the  chairge  is      .  .  .         .   1201  13    4 

Dischearge. 
In  the  first  deburst  to  tlie  haill  sex  poor  men  in  the  hospitall  for 

y^  last  yeir  at  48  tl  the  peice  in  the  qrter     inde  .  .     288     o    o 

Item  for  cloth  to  be  clothes  to  some  of  y'"  and  for  furnishing  yto 

and  making  yof         ..... 
Item  for  sarks  and  shoes  to  y'"  ye  sd  yeir 
Item  for  peits  and  coalls  to  y™  ye  sd  space 
Item  deburst  to  the  ordinarie  penshiouners 
Item  lost  by  some  of  Crumwells  coyne  that  was  in  the  compter 

hand  ...... 

Item  lent  out  upon  band  be  ordour  of  the  hous  to  Ro'  Canither 

Item  to  supplicants  at  Hallow  court 

Item  for  mending  of  the  poor  mens  cloths 

Item  to  Jo"  Greir  be  warrand  for  service 

Item  for  dressing  the  steiplle  door  and  ane  new  key 

Item  to  supplicants  at  Candlmes  court    . 

Item  to  the  rehct  of  vmq"  James  Watsone  tailyo""  be  warrand 

Item  to  ye  sd  Jo"  Grier  offr       .... 

Item  to  Ro*  Adam  off''  .... 

Item  to  Mathew  Colhoun  for  dressing  of  severall  things  in  the 

hospitall        ...... 

Item  to  Wm  Bradie  advocat       .... 

Item  for  renewing  of  the  horning  ag'  Whytsyd    . 

Item  to  some  wther  offs  for  service 

Item  to  ane  distrest  tredsman  lait  deacon  conviner 

Item   to   vmq"   Gabriell    Conynghames    reUct    conform    to    her 

discherge       .  .  .  .  .  .  .         8  10     0 


•    56 

10 

0 

.     26 

10 

0 

.     16 

10 

0 

.  136 

0 

0 

2 

8 

0 

•s  266 

13 

4 

.    18 

12 

0 

I 

4 

0 

9 

0 

0 

0 

8 

0 

•   32 

8 

0 

6 

13 

4 

0 

12 

0 

20 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

20 

0 

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

12 

0 

8 

14 

0 

I 

10 

0 

20 

0 

0 

133 

6 

8 

17 

6 

8 

16 

0 

0 

0 

8 

0 

I 

4 

0 

0 

4 

0 

3S4  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1662 

Item  at  Beltan  court  to  supplicants         .  .  .  .       23  16     o 

Item  to  James  iloodie  for  chearging  ye  sd  Robert  Hunter  in 

\Miytsyd  ...... 

Item  to  the  clerk  for  his  fiall     ..... 

Item  to  ye  colledge  factor  for  the  hospitalls  bursour  the  yeirs 

1660  and  1661  ...... 

Item  to  supplicants  at  Lamas  court  1662 

Item  to  the  maissounes  qlk  they  vvantit  of  ther  pairt  of  the  Gorball 

rent  ....... 

Item  to  Thomas  Kibbell  for  taking  instruments  ag'  W™  Corbet 
Item  deburst  for  ane  tirlize  and  ane  brod  to  vmqi'  James  Duncans 

land  ....... 

Item  for  dressing  ane  of  the  bunkers  in  the  hospitall 

Item  the  comptar  aught  to  be  dischergit  of  the  soum  fallowing 

qi'of  he  made  compt  the  last  yeir  mair  nor  he  got  in  .         100 

Suma  of  the  dischearge  is  .  .  .   1143     o    o 

Sua  chairge  and   dischearge  being  compeared   ther  rests  in  the 
compters  hand  fyftie  eight  pund  xiij  s.  iiij  d. 

Ouhilk  compt  befoir  writtin  being  red  calculated  and  laid  the  samyne 
was  red  allowed  and  approvin  in  eveiy  heid  and  artickles  y''of  and  ordaines 
David  Robesoune  the  compter  to  pay  in  to  Daniell  Purdoune  present  collecto"" 
the  forsd  soume  of  fyftie  eight  pund  threttin  shilling  four  pennies  qlk  being 
payit  and  ye  said  David  having  received  Daniell  Purdoun  his  dischearge 
yrupon  the  said  David  Robesone  yfor  is  heirby  discheargit  of  his  compt 
accordingUe. 

Monye  The  sd  day  there  was  delyverit  to  the  collecto''  Daniell  Purdon  for  ye  last 

coUecto'.  ygjj.g  buj-ggss  silver  threttie  thrie  pund  four  shilUngs  and  the  deacon  conviner 

twelfe  punds  for  armes  to  this  hous  and  appoyntit  yefter  to  be  chairgit  yw* 

at  ye  making  of  his  compt. 

Wrytts  put  in  The  same  day  ther  was  put  in    the  boxe  Ro'  Caruthers    band  of    four 

the  boxe.  hundereth  mrks  w'  his  wj'ffes  ratifica'une  therof  and  the  colledge  collectCs 

dischearge  for  ye  bursour  for  the  yeirs  1660  and  1661. 

Andersoune  The  same  day  Jo°  Andersoune  cordoner  be  pluralitie  of  voits  is  placed  as 

placed.  ^j^g  q{  j-j^g  ggj.  j^^gj^  ij^  ti-jg  hospitall  and  ordaines  him  to  gait  his  allowance  as 

formerly. 

The  same  day  appoynts  the  deacon  conviner  Walter  Neilsoune  Mannass 
Lyll  Jo"  Kerr  Thomas  Campbell  to  foot  compts  w'  Robert  Adame  anent  the 
old  few  dewties. 


i662]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  385 

Fallowes  ane  note  of  the  pticuUer  sowmes  of  monye  awand  in  to  the  crafts 
hospitall  isj'in  the  bur'  of  Glesgow. 

Imprimis  vmqll  James  Duncan  hamerman  was  awand  to  ye  sd  hospitall  ane 
thowsand  merks  for  the  qlk  ther  is  ane  infeftment  past  of  his  lands  in 
favo's  of  the  hospitall  and  poor  y^in  the  aii  rent  qi'of  is  payit  out  of  the 
mailles  of  thes  lands  qlks  mailles  the  collecto''  is  to  seik  in  from  ye 
tennents  y'^oi  and  ane  compt  is  to  be  made  y^anent  betuixt  the  hospitall 
and  thes  quha  hes  now  comprysit  ye  sds  lands  about  q*  bygaine  aii  rents 
is  awand. 

Item  awand  be  Robert  Caruthers  lour  hundereth  merks  conform  to  his  band 
q^'of  ther  will  be  ane  zeirs  afi  rent  awand  at  Mertimes  1662. 

Item  Johne  Colhoune  being  alsoe  adebtit  to  ye  sd  hospitell  ane  thowsand 
merks  qlk  Andrew  King  in  Pollokshawes  hes  taine  wpon  him  to  pay  and 
is  to  infeft  the  poor  of  ye  hospitall  in  his  land  in  Trongait  in  securitie 
y^of  q''of  ther  will  be  ane  yeirs  aii  rent  awand  at  Mertimes  1662. 

Item  awand  be  Willeame  Andersoune  yo''  of  Newtoune  and  his  caul's  be  ther 
band  fyve  hundereth  merks  q'"of  ye  an  rent  is  awand  sen  Witsonday 
1662. 

Item  Willeame  Coats  was  awand  to  ye  sd  hospitall  fyve  hundereth  merks 
for  the  qlk  David  Miller  hes  now  given  band  and  ther  will  be  ane  yeirs 
ail  rent  yi'of  awand  at  Mertimes  1662. 

Item  awand  be  vmqll  George  Lyoune  thrie  hundereth  punds  priiill  soum  and 
at  Candiemes  1658  he  was  awand  of  bygaine  aii  rent  eightin  punds  and 
the  aii  rent  y^'of  is  awand  sen  syne. 

Item  awand  be  Jo"  Miller  tailyo''  now  deacon  conviner  four  hundereth  merks 
q^'of  ther  will  be  awand  of  aii  rent  at  Mertimes  1662  twa  yeirs  and  ane 
half. 

Item  awand  be  Jo"  Bar  as  prinll  Patrick  M'^Ilvicker  hamerman  and  Neill 
Maxwell  in  (  )  as  caul's  for  him  ane  hundereth  punds  q''of 

the  aii  rent  is  awand  sen  Larhas  1662. 

Item  awand  be  Alex''  Govean  ane  hundereth  merks  q^of  the  aii  rent  is  awand 
since  Witsonday  1662. 

Item  awand  be  Robert  Hunter  of  Whytsyd  and  his  caul's  ane  hundereth 
seavintie  ane  punds  ten  shilling  as  being  the  equall  half  of  the  prinll  soum 
contenit  in  his  band  q"'of  he  is  awand  divers  yeirs  aii  rent  but  hes  suspendit 
and  most  be  called. 

Item  vmqll  Edward  Hamiltoun  of  Silvertounhill  being  adebtit  to  vmqll 
Andrew  Mylne  fourtie  punds  scots  the  band  that  ye  sd  laird  gave  y''foir 
was  drawn  wp  in  vmqll  Jo"  Selkrigs  name  and  at  the  desyr  of  ye  sd  vmqll 
Andrew  Mylne  he  assignt  ye  samyne  to  ye  hospitall  q'of  ther  was  noe 
p'  payit  either  of  afi  rent  nor  priiill  som  sen  syne. 
2  A 


386 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TR.\DES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW 


[1662 


Corbet. 


Corbet  and 
Andersoune. 


King  and 
Miller  ther 
bands 
producit. 


Thomesone 
gave  his  othe. 


Prenteis  Jack. 


Duodecimo  Novembris  1662. 

The  same  day  the  deacon  conviner  and  deacones  of  crafts  being  conveined 
it  is  concludit  to  set  ane  lyf  rent  back  to  \\'™  Corbet  and  his  wyfe  and  langest 
liver  of  ye  twa  of  thes  lands  qlk  his  mother  had  formerhe  in  lyf  rent  they 
pacing  therfor  conforme  as  ye  rest  of  ye  land  in  Gorballs  payes  in  that  croft 
q''  they  lye. 

The  same  day  it  is  resolved  to  divyd  the  monethhe  mentenence  that  was 
in  vse  to  be  payit  of  befor  to  Katherin  Andersoune  betuixt  her  and  Ro'  Corbet 
cordoner  ay  and  q"  the  same  be  discheargit. 

Decimo  sexto  Febniarij  1663. 

The  same  day  ther  was  producit  be  the  clerk  -Andrew  Kings  new  band 
for  the  thowsand  merks  w'  the  seasing  of  his  lands  fallowing  yon  qlk  is  put 
in  the  boxe  as  also  the  deacon  conviner  producit  ane  new  band  grantit  be 
David  Miller  and  his  cau''  for  the  f\'\'e  hundereth  merks  that  was  formerhe 
awand  be  ^^'°^  Coats  and  is  alsoe  put  in  the  boxe. 

The  same  day  James  Thomesoune  being  formerhe  electit  deacon  of  the 
chirurgianes  compeired  y^  day  and  declairit  that  he  had  now  acceptit  and 
therfor  his  aith  was  tain  to  be  ane  trew  counsello''  to  the  deacon  conviner  till 
Michaelmes  ni.xt  and  he  named  Jo"  Hall  to  be  his  conjunct  but  he  was  not 
present. 

Primo  Maij  1663. 

The  said  day  George  Jack  sone  lailll  to  the  deceast  Gideone  Jack  in 
(  )  is  buikit  prenteis  w*  .\ndrew  Scot  tailyeor  for  the  space  of 

seivine  yeirs  as  prenteis  and  ser\^and  conforme  to  the    indento''    daitit    the 
twentie  ane  of  Nove''  1660  yeirs. 


Decimo  quarto  August]  1663. 
Lyll  and  The  said  dav  Mannass  Lvll  \\'alter  Neilsoune  .\ndrew  Moodj'  and  Thomas 

the  Gorbaii '     Campbell  ar  appoyntit  to  meit  and  laj-  the  Gorball  rentall  and  to  denotat  and 
'"*^"'-  set  doune  how  meikell  moej-  every  thowsand  merks  awand    to    the  crafts 

hospitall  will  gait  yof  in  lew  of  ther  aii  rent  for  ye  yeir  1662. 

Hall.  The  same  day  Johne  Hall  chii"urgiane  being  formerhe  named  be  ther 

deacon  to  be  for  \''  caUing  on  the  deacon  conviners  counsell  and  he  being  pnt 
ys  day  did  accept  and  give  his  othe  as  vse  is. 

Millers  compt  The  Same  day  the  deacon  conviner  made  his  compt  of  the  crafts  p'  of  the 

°eck"'"^^'^^      seek  was  brought  in  be  ^I''  Campsie  and  his  chairge  and    dischearge  being 

calculated  laid  and  compaired  ther  is  onhe  fund  restand  in  his  hands  seavine 

pund  fyve  shilling  iiij  d.  qlk  he  was  appoyntit  to  give  to  Hendrie  Robesoune 


i663]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  387 

and  Jo"  Pittilloche  for  y  supplie.  Thereft  he  declairit  that  Jo"  Leckie  and 
his  p'niers  ar  awand  (  )  punds  sterhng  qlk  belongs  to  thes  crafts 

who  bought  the  seek  and  he  producit  the  decreit  excitit  ag'  him  for  ye  pryce 
of  ye  sd  seek  be  ye  sd  M^  Campsic  \v'  ane  discherge  yof  as  being  ane  exonera"  une 
to  thes  of  ye  crafts  who  bought  ye  sd  seek  qlk  was  put  in  the  boxe  and  it  is 
to  be  remembrit  that  ye  sd  decreit  was  not  excitit  for  laik  of  tymeous  pay* 
but  for  ye  sd  crafts  ther  better  exonera'une  of  moey  yin  speit  in  respect  ye 
samy  was  arreistit. 

Decimo  septimo  Septembirs  1663. 
Conveined  the  deacon  conviner  and  w'  him  Walter  Neilsoune  Jo" 
Leiper  Jo"   Watsoune    James    Mitchell    James   Thomesoune   James 
Andersoune   George   Ralstoun   Jo"   Walker  Jo"  Glen   Jo"   Falconer 
Ro'  Boyd  and  Jo°  Lindsay. 

The  same  day  the  bill  and  complent  of  Jo"  Auldcorne  and  Ro*  Bogill  .-^nent  foir 
skinners  for  y™selves  and  in  name  of  the  poor  of  ye  sd  tred  against  Mannass  skmnesf ^  ° 
Lyll  George  Clerk  and  \\ '"  Goveane  skinners  being  publictlie  red  over  for  y' 
the  sds  thrie  persones  maks  foir  bargaines  w*  the  flesho^'s  w'in  y^  burgh  in  buying 
of  skinnes  qrby  the  remanent  breyrin  of  ye  sd  tred  and  poor  alsoe  yof  cannot 
gait  skinnes  to  buy  to  work  for  menteining  of  y'"  and  y  famellies  qlk  is  not  onhe 
to  ther  great  hurt  and  skaith  but  alsoe  have  violat  and  broken  the  acts  of  y^ 
burl  set  doun  yanent  qlk  they  have  confest  and  soe  lyabill  for  the  penulties 
obleist  yin  speit  and  therfor  ye  sd  deaconviner  deacones  of  crafts  and  wthers 
forsd  have  remittit  the  dehbera'une  of  ther  sentance  to  the  provest  baillies 
and  counsell  of  y^  bur'  ye  first  melting. 

The  same  day  ordaines  ye  collecto""  to  pay  to  the  clerks  man  W""  Scot  ane  warrand 
dollo''  for  wiytting  ye  decreit  ag'  thes  lyabill  in  pay'  of  ye  few  dewties  in  to  <=°''<"^'°'- 
the  deacon  cyviners  hous. 

22  September  1663. 
The  qlk  day  the  deacon  cy viner  deacones  of  crafts  new  and  old  and  sundrie  Anent  the 
wthers  being  conveined  for  the  better  removing  of    the  debait  and  strylie  new  deacone"^ 
betuixt  ye  coupers  anent  the  electioune  of  ye  deacone  it  is  concludit  that  they  amongs  ye 

...  ,  ,  coupers. 

mak  ane  new  electioune  of  a  deacon  amongs  y^selves  and  y'  neither  the  old 
deacon  nor  new  electit  deacon  be  put  on  lyt  and  y'  non  of  the  calling  who 
adheres  to  the  calumnious  bill  given  in  ag'  Cuthbert  Greg  have  any  voyce  in 
ye  sd  electioune. 

24    September    1663. 
Fallowes  the  compt  made  be  Daniell  Purdoune  for  the  crafts  pairt  of  the  Compt 
lands  of  Gorballes  for  the  crope  1662  with  what  he  hes  frie  of  the  tynds  yof  coUec°™.* 
ye  sd  crope  1662  and  for  quhat  he  hes  to  receive  from  Mathow  Fawsyd  of  the 
nyne  hundreth  fourtie  sex  pund  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  qlk  he  was  to  pay  in  at  the  taking 


388  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1663 

of  the  tynds  for  the  crope  1663  extending  to  ane  hundereth  eightin  pund  vj  s. 
viij  d.  extending  in  haill  to  nyne  hundereth  twentie  seavine  [punds]  sex 
shilling  eight  pennies  aff  the  qlk  ther  was  rebaitit  twelfe  pund  saxtine  shilhng 
eight  pennies  qlk  the  collector  hes  to  pay  for  the  crafts  fourt  pairt  of  ye  few 
dewtie  awand  out  of  the  lands  of  Gorballs  the  crop  1662  and  saxtine  pund 
xiij  s.  iiij  d.  allovvit  to  ye  sd  Daniell  for  his  paines  and  collecting  extending 
both  sowmes  in  haill  to  twentie  nyne  pund  x  s.  sua  rests  to  be  divydit  in  threttie 
ane  p'es  eight  hundereth  four  scoir  seivintine  pund  xvj  s.  viij  d.  and  soe  every 
thowsand  merk  of  threttie  ane  thowsand  merks  falles  twentie  eight  pund 
xvii]  s.  and  the  xxxviij  s.  viij  d.  restand  is  given  to  the  off  to  buy  a  pair  of 
shoes. 

Meinorandiim. 

Memorandum  The  haill  \ictuall  of  ye  crafts  fourt  p*  of  the  lands  of  Gorballs  for  the  crope 

Purdoun  hes     ^^^~  extends  to  ane  hundereth  twenty  ane  holies  twa  furlots  twa  pecks  tua 
receivit.  fourth  p*es  beir  and  Daniell  Purdoune  receavit  for  Foulles  and  wthers  fyve 

pund  fyftine  shilling  and  frae  W"  Corbet  fourtie  shilhng. 

Vigesimo  primo  Odobris  1663. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacon  conviner  deacones  of  crafts  and  ther  bretherine 
of  counsell  being  conveined  for  electing  and  choysing  tua  of  ther  number  to 
be  presentit  to  the  provest  baillies  and  counsell  of  y^  bur^  w*  the  old  deacon 
conviner  to  the  effect  y'  ane  of  y"'  might  be  choysen  deacon  cy\'iner  for  ane 
\^ear  to  come  conforme  to  the  act  contenit  in  the  Ire  of  gildrie  set  doun  yanent 
be  pluralitie  of  voites  thes  persounes  fallowing  wer  electit  and  choysen  to  the 
effect  forsd  viz  ^^'alter  Neilsoune  maltman  and  Jo"  Hall  chirurgian  and  ordaines 
this  lyt  to  be  presentit  be  Alex''  Jafray  and  Mathew  Fawsyd. 

The  same  day  Jo"  Miller  was  continowed  deacon  cyviner  for  ane  year 
to  come. 

Vigesimo  seciimio  Odobris  1663. 

FalloaS  the  names  of  thes  leJio  ar  appoyiilit  to  be  on  the  deacon  cyviners 
counsell  for  the  yeir  enshewing. 

Alex''  Jafray  Jo"  Wallace  visitor 

Rot  Caruthers  Jo"  Danizell 

Ro'  M^^Ymphray  Mathew  Cumyng 

Mathew  Fawsyd  Ro*  Findlay 

Jo"  Clerk  Alex""  Holmes 

James  Frank  Jo"  Walker 
Johne  Clark  wiver 


i663l        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 

James  Colhoune  bailzie 
Hemermen      Alexf  Goveane  Maltmen 


3S9 


Tailyeo'"s 


Cordoners 


Baxters 


Maissounes 


Alex"'  Goveane 
Jo"  Maxwell 
Jo"  Leiper 
David  Robesoun 
Harie  Watt 

Jo"  Ken- 
Rot  Boyd 
Jo"  Birsket 
James  Davidsoune 
Adam  Woddrow 

James  Mitchell 
James  Waddrop 
Gabriell  Corbet 
Jo"  Listoune 
W™  Coats 


W"i  Glen 
Daniel!  Purdoune 

W">  Boyd 
Ro'  Boyd  yo'' 


Wrightes 


Skinners 


Cowpers 


Flesho's 


Jo"  \\'atsoune 
Andrew  Muidie 
Walter  Neilsoun 
Thomas  Campbell 
Patrick  Bryce 

Thomas  Miller 
Gabriel  Cumyng 


Mannass  Lyll 
George  Clerk 

James  Andersoune 
James  Smyth 


George  Broome 
Michael  Gilmour 


Bonnetmakers  Niniane  Spens 


Gairners 


Chirurgianes  Jo"  Hall 


James  Heriott 
George  Ralstoune 


Weivers 


Johne  Falconer 
Patrick  Bryce 
Ar"  Glen 


Vigesimo  Novembris  1663. 

The  qlk  day  Daniell  Purdoun  lait  collector  made  his  compt  of  his  haill 
recepts  and  debursments  of  the  hospitalls  guids  q^of  chairge  and  dischearge 
is  as  follous  and  first  the 


Chairge. 

In  the  first  receavit  be  the  compter  frae  Johne  Miller  deacon 

conviner  in  satisfactioun  of  his  airmes  conforme  to  tlie  coinoun 

ordour  ■••.... 

Item  receavit  frae  George  Clark  of  burgess  silver 

Item  frae  the  deacon  of  the  wivers  that  was  [awand]  be  that  tred 

be  band        ..... 


12 
33 


20     0 


390 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1663 


Item  receavit  frae  James  Andersoun  cowper  and  James  Mitchell 

cordoner  for  ther  gildrie  fynes         .... 
Item  receavit  frae  the  decon  cyviner  that  was  gottin  aff  the  schip 

that  brought  in  the  iron       ..... 
Item  receavit  for  the  aii  rent  of  the  8000  merks  Ij'ing  on  the  land 

of  Gorballs  at  28  ll  i8s.  per  mille  is  .  .  . 

Item  frae  the  haill  deacones  for  ther  quarter  compts  for  susten- 

ta^ne  of  the  poor  men  in  the  hous     .... 
Item  receavit  of  aii  rent  of  the  500  marks  awand  be  W"  Coats 

and  David  Miller  frae  Mertimes  1661  to  Mertimes  1662 
Item  frae  Andrew  King  for  the  aii  rent  of  the  1000  marks  awand 

be  him  the  sd  yeir  ..... 

Item  frae  W™  Andersoune  for  the  an  rent  of  500  merks  awand  be 

him  frae  Witsonday  1662  to  Mertimes  1663 
Item  frae  Margret  Howie  for  ye  maill  of  the  laigh  hous  in  wmqll 

James    Duncans    land    frae    Witsonday    1662    to    Mertimes 

yefter  ....... 

Item  receavit  frae  Jo"  Clerk  maisoune  for  the  maiU  of  y*  p'  of  ye 

sds  lands  occupyet  be  him  preceiding  Witsonday  1663 
Item  frae  Robert  Caruthers  for  the  ah  rent  of  the  400  marks  awand 

be  him  fra  Mertimes  1661  to  Witsonday  1662 
Item  frae  ye  deacons  of  the  heiriermen  and  wrights  of  sword  moey 
Item  frae  Johne  Bar  for  the  aii  rent  of  the  ane  hundereth  punds 

awand  be  him  frae  Laiiias  1662  to  Lamas  1663 
Item  receavit  from  David  Robesoune  last  collecto'  as  a  p'  of  that 

qch  he  was  restand  of  his  last  compt 
Item  receavit  from  Robert  Adame  as  a  pt  of  the  grund  anwalls 

contenit  in  the  rentall  that  is  restand  awand  vnpayit 
Item  receavit  from  the  deacon  cyviner  for  tua  year  and  a  halfes 

aii  rent  of  the  400  marks  awand  be  him  to  the  hospitall  and 

that  iiiiediathe  preceiding  Mertimes  1662     . 

Suiiia  of  the  chairge  is 

nyne  hundereth  four  scoir  fyftine  pundes  4s.  8d. 

Dtscheargc. 
In  the  first  deburst  be  the  compter  to  the  sex  poor  men  in  the 

hous  for  ther  pensioune  the  haill  yeir 
Item  for  peits  and  coalles  the  sd  space     . 
Item  for  clothes  and  furnishing  y'to 
Item  for  sex  pair  of  shoone  to  y™ 
Item  for  42  ells  at  9s.  per  ell  for  sarking  cloth 
Item   to   the  monethhe  pensioun's 
Item  to  help  to  buric  ane  of  the  poor  men 


14 


58 


231     4     0 


206    6    8 


20 


40 


20     o 


8     o 


60     o     0 


8 
16 


100 


40 


600 


27  16 


288     0 

0 

16     0 

0 

31     0 

0 

12      0 

0 

18    12 

0 

115    16 

0 

I    16 

0 

i663]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


391 


Item  to  Gabriell  Conynghames  relict  be  right  of  her  lyfrent 

Item  deburst  to  severall  poor  peopell  at  Hallowmes  court 

Item  to  Robert  Adame  off  to  bring  in  Andrew  King 

Item  to  Johne  Falconer  ane  bursour 

Item  to  Jo"  Currie  for  mending  of  Jo"  Reids  clothes  and  for  a 

spead  heid  ..... 

Item  to  Ro'  Adame  at  comand  of  the  deacon  cyviner  for  his  service 
Item  to  supphcants  at  Candelmes  court 
Item  to  \\""  Bradie  for  his  pensioune 

Item  to  Jo"  Xeill  for  warning  the  deacones  and  for  a  coaU  ridel 
Item  to  the  clerk  for  his  hall       .... 
Item  to  Ro'  Miller  post  for  taking  Ires  to  Hunter  of  Quhytsyd 
Item  lent  to  Robert  Banks  conforme  to  the  ordour  of  the  hous 
Item  to  the  sd  Johne  Falconer  bursour    . 
Item  to  Jo"  Greir  off"^  be  ordour 
Item  to  Jo"  Currie  for  farder  mending  of  clothes 
Item  for  a  swey  trie  to  James  Duncanes  land 
Item  to  the  colledge  collectour  for  ane  bursour  the  yeir  1662 
Item  for  bands  to  the  hous  door  naills  and  leid    . 
Item  to  W™  Scot  the  clerks  man  for  wrj'tting  of  the  decreit 

concerning  the  grund  anuells 

Suma  of  the  dischearge  is 

eight  hundereth  saxtine  punds  7s.  8d. 


8 

10 

0 

•   19 

6 

0 

0 

6 

0 

•  33 

6 

8 

I 

I 

0 

e   20 

0 

0 

•   38 

2 

0 

20 

0 

0 

11    0 

12 

0 

20 

0 

0 

d   2 

8 

0 

.   60 

0 

0 

•   33 

6 

8 

3 

0 

0 

I 

4 

0 

I 

4 

0 

.   66 

13 

4 

I 

0 

0 

2  18     o 


And  sua  chairge  and  dischearge  being  compaired  ther  rests  in  the 
compters  hand  ane  hundereth  thrie  scoir  eightin  punds  173.  scots. 

Quhilk  compt  befoir  wiyttin  being  at  lenth  hard  red  calculated  and  layd 
the  samy  was  allowit  and  approvine  both  chairge  and  dischearge  y^'in  confined 
and  the  sd  compter  is  discheargit  accordinghe  he  having  first  payit  to  the 
subsequent  coUecto''  the  forsd  sowme  of  178  "S  17s.  scots  that  is  restand  in 
his  hands. 

The  same  day  be  plurahtie  of  voites  the  abovenamed   Daniell  Purdoune  purdoun 
is  yet  continouit  collector  to  the  hospitall  for  ane  yeir  to  come.  colector. 

Fallowes  ane  note  of  the  pticidlar  sowmes  of  nwey  awand  in  to  the  crofts 
hospital  within  the  burghe  of  Glesgow. 
Imprimis  vmq"  James  Duncane  heriierman  was  awand  to  the  hospitall  ane 
thowsand  marks  for  the  qlk  ther  is  ane  infeftment  past  of  his  lands  in 
favour  of  the  hospitall  and  poor  yi'in  the  ari  rent  q''of  is  payit  out  of  the 
maills  of  thes  lands  qlks  maills  the  collecto''  is  to  seik  in  from  the  tennents 
yof  and  ane  compt  is  to  be  made  yanent  betuixt  the  hospitall  and  thes  who 
hes  now  comprysit  ye  sds  lands  anent  quhat  bygaine  aii  rents  is  awand. 


392  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1663 

Item  ther  is  avvand  be  Ro*  Cai-uthers  be  band  four  hundereth  merks  q''of  the 

an  rent  is  awand  sen  Witsonday  1662. 
Item  awand  be  Andrew  King  ane  thowsand  marks  in  securitie  q^of   the  poor 

ar  Lnfeft  in  his  lands  in  Trongait  and  the  air  rent  is  awand  sen  Mertimes 

1662. 
Item  awand  be  W">  Andersoune  yo''  of  Newtoune  fyfe  hundreth  merks  q^'of 

the  an  rent  is  awand  sen  Witsonday  1663. 
Item  awand  be  David  Miller  fyve  hundereth  merks  q^'of  the  an  rent  is  avvand 

sen  Mertimes  1662. 
Item  awand  be  vmq"  George  Lyoune  thrie  hundereth  punds  prin"  sowme 

and  at  Candelmes  1658  he  was  awand  of  bygaine  aii  rent  eightin  punds 

and  the  aii  rent  yof  is  awand  ever  sen  syne. 
Item  awand  be  Jo"  Miller  now  deacon  cyviner  four  hundereth  merks  q'"of  the 

an  rent  is  awand  sen  Mertimes  1662. 
Item  awand  be  Jo°  Bar  as  prin"  Patrick  M^^Ilvickar  heinerman  and  Neill 

MaxueU  in  (  )  as  caul's  for  him  q^'of  the  an  rent  is  awand  sen 

Laihas  1663. 
Item  awand  be  Ro'  Hunter  of  Ouhytsyd  and  his  caul's  ane  hundreth  seavintie 

ane  punds  ten  shilhngs  as  being  the  equall  half  of  the  prin"  sowme  con- 

tenit  in  his  band  q''of  he  is  awand  divers  yeirs  afi  rent  but  hes  suspendit 

and  most  be  called. 
Item   vmq"   Edward   Hamiltoune   of   Silvertounhill   being   adebtit   to   vmq" 

Andrew  Mylne  fourty  punds  scots  the  band  that  ye  sd  laird  gave  yfoir 

was  drawne  wp  in  vmq"  Jo"  Selkrigs  name  and  at  the  des}'""  of  ye    sd 

vmq"  Andrew  JMyhie  he  assignit  the  samy  to  the  hospitall  q'of  ther  was 

noe  pt  payit  either  of  aii  rent  nor  prin"  sowme  sen  syne. 
Item  awand  yet  be  David  Robesoune  to  compleit  what  he  was  restand  at  his 

last  compt  threttie  punds  vij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  awand  be  Alex""  Goveane  ane  hundreth  marks  q^of  the  aii  rent  is  awand 

sen  Witsonday  1662. 

Vigesimo  Maij  1664. 

Millers  compt  The  qlk  day  the  deacon  cyviner  deacones  of  crafts  and  ther  bretherine 

to  be  revised.  ^^  counsell  being  convenit  quha  for  the  most  p'  wer  pnt  appoynts  BaiUie 
Collioune  JIannass  Lyll  Alex^^  Jafray  Jo"  Danizell  Jo»  W'allace  visito''  George 
Clerk  skinner  and  James  Jlitchell  cordoner  to  meit  w*  Jo"  Miller  deacon  cj^viner 
and  to  reveise  againe  to  him  his  compt  anent  the  seek  and  to  report  yanent 
the  nixt  meeting  and  the  sd  BaiUie  Colhoun  to  convein  y'". 

Jafray.  The  sd  day  in  anser  to  the  complent  given  in  be  Alexander  Jafray  against 

Patrick  M'^Ilvicar  appoynts  thes  who  wer  formerlie  appoyntit  to  agrie  y"i 
to  meit  this  day  in  the  eftemoone  for  y'  effect  and  Jo"  Hall  to  be  conveined. 


1664]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  393 

The  sd  day  ordaines  W™  PoUok  cowper  to  give  ana  dischearge  to  Jo"  Nisbit. 
Nisbit  his  last  prenteis  of  his  prenteiship  and  approves  the  act    given    out 
yanent  be  the  deacon  of  coupers  and  his  m'^s. 

The  sd  day  ordaines  the  collector  to  lend  to  Patrick  Watson  fiesho''  fourty  Mouey  lent  to 
merks  upon  his  band.  "  Watsoune. 

The  same  day  the  twenty  dollo''s  that  was  gottin  from  James  Hamiltoune  MoMey  givea 
and  his  p'nier  that  cam  from  Derrie  w'  the  seek  is  given  to  the  collecto''  and  collecto'. 
ordaines  him  to  be  chargit  ywith. 

The  sd  day  it  being  regraitit  that  the  poor  men  has  deseartit  the  hospitall  The  poor  of 
and  doeth  not  lye  y'in  as  formerly  conform  to  ther  instructiounes  it  is  yfor  to'iye°m'the 
this  day  ordained  that  they  and  every  ane  of  y""  lye  in  the  hospitall  heirefter  ''°"^- 
and  who  ever  does  m  the  contrar  to  be  pntlie  debarred  aff  the  hous. 

The  sd  day  ordaines  the  collector  to  be  chairgit  w'  the  sowme  of    ane  To  chairge 
hundereth  and  twenty  punds  receivit  be  him  from  W'"  Patersoune  cordoner  for  thirTua 
for  his  gildrie  fyne  and  w'  the  sowme  of  ane  hundereth  and  seivintine  pund  sowmes. 
receivit  be  him  frae  W""  Stein. 

Decimo  sexto  Augitsij  1664. 

The  qlk  day  Johne  Millar  deacon  conviner  w^  the  deacons  of  crafts  who  Compt 
for  the  most  p'  wer  pnt  w'  Thomas  Campbell  Johne  Ker  and  divers  wthers  tiie^Gorbau""^ 
of  ther  bretherine  of  counsell  being  conveined  for  the  heiring  of  Daniell  Purdoun  rent  cropt 
collecto""  his  compt  of  the  crafts  fourt  p*  of  the  rent  of  Gorballs  for  the  cropt 
and  yeir  of  God  1663  yeirs  and  vmqll  Jonnet  Maxuell  Willeam  Corbets  mother 
being  now  deceast  that  qlk  shoe  was  in  vse  to  pay  be  vertew  of  her  old  rentall 
being  now  made  up  all  in  victuall  is  found  efter  compt  to  amount  to  fourtine 
boUes  beir  and  so  be  calcuUa'une  the  crafts  haill  fourt  p'  of  the  rent  of  the 
sds  lands  the  forsd  cropt  extends  to  sex  scoir  ten  bolles  bear  and  the  fear  being 
set  doune  at  fyve  pund  ten  shilling  the  boll  the  samy  extends  to  in  monye  to 
seavine  hundereth  fyftine  pund  scots.  Item  farder  the  sd  Daniell  Purdoune 
collecto^'  intromittit  w'  the  last  tmes  pay'  of  the  fourt  p'  of  the  tynds  of  Gorballs 
as  they  wer  set  at  Lamas  1663  extending  to  118 — 6 — 8  aff  the  qlk  he  deburst 
to  the  colledge  for  the  crafts  fourt  p'  of  the  tynds  awand  out  of  the  sd  land 
the  sd  yeir  thrie  scoir  fourtine  [1i]  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  and  ther  is  allouit  to  the  collecto'' 
himself  for  his  paines  twenty  fyve  merks.  Soe  both  soumes  deburst  extend 
to  four  scoir  alleivine  punds  sex  shilhng  eight  pennies  and  sua  rests  onlie  frie 
of  the  sd  tynds  twenty  seavine  pund  scots  qlk  being  addit  to  the  forsd  scum 
of  seivine  hundereth  and  fyftine  punds  amounts  in  haill  to  seivine  hundereth 
and  fourty  tua  punds  qlk  is  to  be  divydit  be  the  hous  amongst  the  crafts 
quha  deburst  for  the  fourt  p'  of  the  Gorballes  and  efter  casting  of  the  wholl 


394 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1664 


compt  it  is  fund  that  every  thowsand  mark  will  fall  only  of  aii  rent  at  ys  time 
twenty  thrie  pund  eightin  shillings  scots  and  for  the  twenty  shilling  scots  y' 
is  restand  vndivydit  appoynts  the  same  to  be  given  to  Ro*  Adame  off. 

Duodecimo  Octobris  1664. 
The  said  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  the  deacones  of  crafts  and  their  bretherin 
of  counsell  being  conveined  for  electing  thrie  of  their  number  to  be  presentit 
this  day  to  the  provest  bailUes  and  counsell  of  this  burgh  and  wy^s  having 
intrest  that  ane  of  y""  myght  be  made  choyse  of  as  deacon  cyveiner  for  the 
year  enshe\\ing  be  pluraUtie  of  vots  Walter  Neilsoune  Mannass  Lyll  and  W'" 
Boyd  wer  electit  and  choysen  for  that  effect  and  ordaines  the  deacones  of 
hammermen  tailyeo^'s  and  cordoners  to  pnt  the  lytt. 

Lykas  the  same  day  the  said  \\'alter  Neilsoune  being  choysen  deacon 
conveiner  the  persones  following  wer  electit  and  choysen  to  be  on  his  counsell 
for  ane  year  to  come  viz 

Deacones 


Johne  Maxwell 
James  Davidsoune 
Williame  Coatis 
Daniel  Purdoune 
Patrik  Bryce  weaver 
James  Thomesone 
Robert  Boyd  yo'' 


Jo"  Miller  visitor 
Alex''  Eghngtoune 
Williame  Goveane 
Jo"  Robesoune 
George  Broome 
Niniane  Spans 


Hamermen 


Tailzeors 


Cordoners 


Jo"  Ker  bailhe 


Alex''  Jafray 
Alex'  Goveane 
Jo"  Leiper 
Harie  Wat 
David  Robesoune 

Jo"  Miller 
Ro'  Caruthers 
W"  Knox 
Adame  Woodrow 


Rot  M^^Umphray 
James  Thomesoune 
James  Waddrop 
Jo"  Listoune 
Gabriell  Corbett 


Maltmen  Thomas  Campbell 

Andrew  i\Ioodie 
Jo"  Wallace 
Patrick  Bryce 
Jo"  Watsoune 

Wrights  Jo"  Danizell 

Jo"  Cors  yo' 


Skinners 


Coupers 


Maneisses  Lyll 
Mathow  Cumyng 


Ro'  Findlay 
James  Smith 


1664]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


395 


Baxters 


Weavers 


Mathow  Fausyd 
Jo"  Scott 

Johne  Falconer 
Jo"  Clark 
David  Pitcaime 


Flesho''s 


Alex^  Holmes 
James  Gilmor 


Chirurgians     Jo"  Hall 


Bonettmakers  Jo»  Walker 


Gairdneris         Johne  Bartoun 
James  Heriott 


Measounes 


Jo"  Clark 
\\'illiam  Boyd 


Decinio  tertio  Octoris  1664. 

The  whilk  day  the  deacon  conveiner  with  the  deacones  of  crafts  and  his  Four  men 
new  counsell  being  cyveined  for  electing  of  four  persones  of  their  number  to  onufe  deane^ 
be  choysen  out  for  the  crafts  to  sitt  wpon  the  deane  of  gilds  counsell  for  the  "*  s'''^f, 

.  counsell. 

year  to  come  be  pluralitie  of  vots  theis  psones  fallowing  wer  electit  and  choysen 
to  the  effect  forsd  Thomas  Campbell  malt.  Jo"  Miller  tailyeo""  Williame  Boyd 
measoune  Patrik  Bryce  malt,  and  recomends  to  the  deaconveiner  to  pnt  them. 

Decimo  quarto  Novcmbris  1664. 

The  qlk  day  Walter  Neilsoune  dean  convener  with  the  deacones  of  craft  Counsell 
and  bretherine  of  his  counsell  wha  for  the  most  p*  wer  present  all  of  them  to  ^"°™''- 
witt  the  saids  deacones  of  crafts  and  remanent  of  that  counsell  except  thes 
who  is  notted  absent  gave  ther  othes  to  be  faithfull  and  trew  counsellars  to 
the  dean  convenar  for  ane  year  to  com. 

The  sam  day  be  pluraliti  of  vots  Patrick    Bryce    maltman  is  choysen  Bryce 
coUecto''  for  the  hospitall  for  ane  yeair  to  com  wha  being  present  did  except  '=°"^<='^'- 
[?  accept]  and  gave  his  oath  de  ficieli  administra' ne  as  vse  is. 

The  sam  day  it  is  statut  and  ordained  that  the  haill  quarter  com})ts  be  Quarter 
payed  at  the  boord  to  the  collecto''  as  formerlie  at  everie  quarters  meitting  payed?  '°  ^^ 
wnder  the  paine  of  dowbling. 

The  sam  day  apoynts  the  dean  convenar  Thomas  Campbell  and    the  Auditours  to 
collector  to  tak  ane  coumpt  of  Robert  Adame  anent  q'  is  awand  of  the  aii  Ad'a'?lfe'and'^°' 
rents  dew  to  the  hospitall  as  also  to  coumpt  with  John  Clark  meason  for  the  ^^y'^- 
year  and  halfs  meill  he  is  awand  out  of  James  Duncanes  land  and  to  coumpt 
w'  the  rest  of  the  persounes  intressed  yin. 

The  sam  day  in  respect  of  the  heavie  burding  that  hes  lyn  wpon  the  hous 
thes  many  years  bygaine  it  is  statut  and  ordaned  that  y  be  nothing  gevine  out 
or  debursed  be  the  collector's  to  the  exterordinari  pentiouners  in  tyme  coming. 


20 

0 

0 

II 

O 

0 

117 

0 

0 

58 

0 

0 

120 

0 

0 

396  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1664 

The  sam  day  Daniell  Purdoune  kit  collecto''  maid  coumpt  of  his  intro- 
missioune  with  the  hospitalls  rents  this  last  j'eair  and  debursment  therof 
qrof  charge  and  discharge  follows  and  first  the 

Charge. 

Imprimis  ther  rested  in  liis  hands  of  the  last  years  compt  .  .     178  17     o 

Ite  receaved  from  George  Clark  of  burges  money  .  .       21  14     o 

Ite  from  Alex''  Govan  for  arent  of  100  merks  fra  Witsonday  1662 

to  Martimes  1663  being  a  yeir  and  a  half     .  .  .600 

Ite  from  Andrew  King  for  afi  rent  of  1000  merks  fra  Mart.  1662 

to   Mart.    1663  .  .  .  .  .  .       40     0     o 

Ite  from  Da\'id  Miller  ah  rent  for  500  merks  fra  Mart.  1662  to 

Mart.     1663  ..... 

Ite  for  a  half  yeirs  maill  of  James  Duncans  land  to  Martimes  1663 
Ite  from  William  Steven  for  his  gihy  fyne 
Ite  from  Johne  Miller  for  profeit  of  sack  ventor 
Ite  from  William  Paterson  for  his  gilry  fyne 
Ite  from  WiUiam  Andersone  a  yeirs  ah  rent  of  500  merks  to  Wit- 
sonday  1664  .  .  .  .  .  .       20     o 

Ite  from  George  Bar  a  3-eirs  aii  rent  of  100  pur.ds  to  Lambmes 

1664  .  .  .  .  .  .  .60 

Ite  for  half  a  yeirs  maill  of  James  Duncans  land  to  Witsonday 

1664  .  .  .  .  .  .  .        II     o 

Ite  from  Andrew  King  half  ane  yeirs  ah  rent  of  1000  merks  to 

\\'its.  1664  .  ."  . 

Ite  for  the  Gorball  rent  the  yeir  1664      .... 
Ite  from  the  deacons  of  quarter  compts  for  the  yeir  1664 
Ite  from  Robert   M<^Umphray  Johne  Clark   Robert   Finlay  and 

Mathew  Fausyd  for  ther  suord  money 
Ite  from  Robert  Adam  of  ground  aii  rent 

Suffia  of  the  haill  charg  is 

ane    thousand    ane    hundreth    auchtine    punds 
shillings. 

Follows  the  compters  discharge. 

In  the  first  debursed  to  Gabriell  Cuninghames  rehct  conforme  to 

her  discharge  .  .  .  .  .  .         S  10 

Item  deburst  for  straw  rigging  leiding  therof  and  workmanshipe 

in  repairing  vmqll  James  Duncans  land  conform   to  order       56     9 

Item  deburst  to  Robert  Adame  at  coihand  of  the  deacons  .       20     o 

Item  deburst  to  William  Braidie  his  ordinaiy  fiall  conforme  to 

order  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       20    o 


20 

0 

0 

191 

4 

0 

26 

6 

8 

40 

0 

0 

51 

16 

0 

seav 

^inti 

ine 

I 

12 

0 

20 

0 

0 

26 

13 

4 

39 

6 

8 

0 

6 

0 

65 

13 

4 

23 

6 

8 

17 

0 

0 

"5 

4 

0 

288 

0 

0 

27 

12 

0 

1664]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  397 

Item  deburst  for  bottoming  of  beds  mending  locks  and  for  new 
bands  to  the  hospitall  hous  .... 

Item  deburst  to  William  Zair  for  his  feall 

Item  deburst  and  lent  to  Patrick  Watsoune  conforme  to  order 
of   the   hous  ...... 

Item  deburst  to  the  supphcants  at  Beltane  court 
Item  deburst  to  Ro'  Miller  for  carying  a  letter  to  Whytside 
Item  deburst  to  .\lbert  Nisbit  for  Howisouns  bursof  in  colledge 
Item  deburst   for  dressing  and  pointing  the  hospitall  hous  for 

lyme  sclatts  fogg  nailes  and  workmanship  as  y""  accompt 
Item  deburst  for  coales  to  the  pensioners  the  whole  yeir 
Item  deburst  to  the  pensioners  without  the  hous  the  whole  yeir 
Item  deburst  to  the  pensioners  within  the  hous  the  whole  yeir 
Item  deburst  to  the  sd  pensioners  for  sarks  and  shooes    . 

Suma  of  the  foir  wryttin  charge  [?  discharge]  extens  to 

seavine  hundereth  threttie  punds  thretin   shillings  awght 
pennies. 

And  swa  charge  and  discharg  being  compered  ther  rests  yet  in 
the  compt""  hand  thrie  hundreth  four  scoir  awght  jnmds  3s.  8d. 

Qlk  is  instantlie  delivered  be  the  compf"  to  Patrick  Bryce  now  ellectit 
coUecto''  and  he  is  to  be  chargit  ywith  at  the  making  of  his  compt  and  w^ith 
tuentie  nvne  punds  tuelf  shilhng  8d.  delyverit  to  him  also  be  John  Watsoun 
for  the  last  yeirs  burges  silver  and  so  the  abovenamed  Daniel  Purdoun  compter 
forsd  is  heirby  dischargit  accordinlie  and  ordaines  the  collecto''  to  receave 
fra  the  lait  dekine  cyvinar  the  ten  pund  sterling  is  in  his  hands  belonging  to 
the  hous  and  he  is  to  be  chargit  y''\\  •• 

Followes  the  cattollogg  of  the  bands  conteining  the  sowmes  of  money 
belonging  to  the  craftis  hospitall  in  Glasgow. 

In  the  first  ther  is  adebtit  be  Androw  King  in  PoUokshavves  to  the  poor  in  the 
said  hospitall  ane  thousand  merks  for  the  qlk  they  stand  infeft  in  his 
lands  in  Trongait  and  the  an  rent  yof  is  awand  sen  Witsonday  1664. 

Item  vmq"  James  Duncane  brassmith  was  awand  to  the  said  hospitall  ane 
thousand  marks  in  securitie  qrof  the  ])oor  stands  infeft  in  his  lands  in 
Saltmerkat  but  the  bygaine  ari  rent  yof  cannot  be  cleired  q"  the  deacon 
cyveiner  Thomas  Campbell  and  the  collecto''  cognosce  ywpon  conforme 
to  the  ordors  given  yranent  and  its  to  be  remembrit  that  Johne  Clark 
ane  of  the  tennants  of  the  saids  lands  will  be  awand  ane  j^eare  and  a  halfes 
main  at  Witsonday  1664. 

Item  ane  band  grantit  be  Alex''  Goveane  conteining  ane  hundreth  marks 
qrof  ther  is  ane  years  aii  rent  awand  at  Mertimes  1664. 


398  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1664 

Item  ane  band  grantit  be  David  Miller  merchand  cyteining  the  sowTne  of 

500  marks  qrof  there  is  ane  yeires  aii  rent  awand  at  Mertimes  1664. 
Item  ane  band  grantit  be  William  Andersoune  now  provest  conteining  the 

sowme  of  500  merks  qrof  ther  will  [be]  half  ane  yeares  afi  rent  awand  at 

Mertimes  1664. 
Item  ane  band  grantit  be  vmq"  John  Bar  and  his  cawtioner  conteining  the 

sowme  of  ane  hundreth  punds  principall  qrof  the  afi  rent  is  awand  sen 

Lambes  1664. 
Item  ane  band  grantit  be  vmq"  Robert  Caruthers  tailye''  and  his  cawtioner 

conteaning  the  sowme  of  four  hundreth  marks  qrof  the  aii  rent  is  awand 

sen  Witsonday  1662. 
Item  ane  band  grantit  be  John  Miller  tailyeo''  lait  deaconvenar  conteining  the 

sowme  of  400  marks  qrof  the  aii  rent  is  awand  sen  Mertimes  1664. 
Item  aN\and  be  Robert  Hunter  of  Whytsyd  and  his  cawtioners  seavintie  ane 

punds  X  s.  as  being  the  equall  halfe  of  the  priiill  sowme  cyteined  in  his 

band  qrof  ther  is  sundrie  yeares  aii  rent  awand  but  he  has  suspendit  the 

charge  given  for  that  effect. 
Item  vmq"   Edward   Hamiltoune   of  Silvertounehill   being  awand   to  vmq'' 

Androw  Mylne  fourtie  punds  the  band  grantit  therfor  was  drawne  wp  in 

name  of  vmq"  John  Selkrig  and  he  at  desy^  of  the  said  vmq"  Androw 

Milne  assignit  the  same  to  the  hospitall  qlk  could  never  zet  be  gottin. 
Item  David  Robesoune  beltmaker  zit  is  awand  that  qlk  was  restand  in  his  hand 

at  the  making  of  his  compt  extending  to  threttie  punds  seavine  shilling 

iiij  d. 

Qiiinto  Deccmhris  1664. 
Hall  swome.  This  day  Johne  Hall  chirurgiane  being  choyesen  to  be  ane  of  the  bretheren 

of  counsell  give  his  oathe  as  vse  is. 

Bands  in  the  Ordaines  the  collectoure  to  tr}'  at  William  Zair  clerk  anent  Androw  Kings 

band  and  seasing  following  thairwpon  becaus  not  fund  in  the  box  and  the 
bands  in  the  bo.x  ar  thos,  WTnqeU  James  Duncanes  band  Alexander  Goveanes 
band  David  Millers  William  Andersounes  Robert  Caruthers  Johne  Millers 
bandes  quhilk  ar  all  left  thairin. 

Memorandum  This  da\'  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  wmqell  Johne  Bares  regrat  band 

coiieaour.  ^^i^h  the  priiill  thairof  is  delyvered  to  Patrick  Bryce  collectoure  to  be  put  to 
executioune  againest  the  caueres  thairin  named  and  ordaines  him  to  try  at 
the  clerk  anent  Whytsyds  band  and  also  ordaines  him  to  seek  in  with  all 
diligence  the  xxx  ll  vij  s.  iiij  d.  qlk  is  awand  be  David  Robesoune  sine  he  was 
coUectour. 

Jurnayman  The  sd  day  it  is  Statute  and  ordained  that  everie  jurnayman  amonge  the 

courdouner.  cordouners  being  ane  stranger  shall  pay  at  his  booking  to  the  calling  for  the 
Weill  of  thair  poor  fj-ve  schilling  sterling. 


1664]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  399 

The  sam  day  in  considerationne  that  John  Currie  at  hes  last  admissioune  Act  anent 
within  the  hospitall  did  promeis  ane  luinderethe  mark  for  the  help  of  the  orthepoor^ 
hows  its  stock  qlk  he  hes  not  perfonned  but  given  it  out  ane  wther  way  thairfor  menes 

pensioncs  for 

be  pluralitie  of  votes  they  have  taken  aff  his  zeirhe  pensioune  aughte  pundes  atyme. 
to  be  given  to  James  Oggelvie  and  sicklyk  hes  taken  aff  James  Winzetts 
pensioune  qlk  was  ordained  to  be  given  to  wmqell  Thomas  Andersounes 
relicte  and  Archibald  Home  equallie  betwixt  them  and  thair  is  taken  aff 
Thomas  Nesmith  bonnetmaker  his  pensioune  wther  aught  pundes  qlk  is 
ordained  to  be  given  to  James  Corbett  bonnetmaker  and  wther  aught  pundes 
taken  of  Johne  Andersoune  cordouner  his  pensioune  and  is  ordainit  to  be 
payit  to  Robert  Corbett  cordouner  and  this  to  stand  onlie  dureing  the  will  of 
the  deackone  conveiner  deackones  of  craftes  and  thair  counsell. 

This  sam  daj'  in  respect  it  is  the  oppinioune  and  desyere  of  many  that  Anent 
the  hospitall  be  taken  downe  and  augmented  it  is  thairfor  recoinended  to  the'hosmtall. 
everie  deackone  to  conveine  hes  calling  and  to  try  what  they  will  contrabute 
for  that   effecte  and  ordaines  the    deackone  conveiner  Johne   Miller    Johne 
Max\\ell  Patrick  Bryce  James  Davidsoune  and  Thomas  Campbell  to  speik 
with  Johne  Clarke  and  Robert  Boyd  thairanent  and  to   reporte. 

Decimo  tertio  Decembris  1664. 

Conveined  Walter  Neilsoune  deackone  conveiner  Thomas  Camp- 
bell Johne  Hall  Manasses  Lyll  James  Davidsoune  Johne  Maxwell 
Johne  Miller  Patrick  Bryce  William  Cottes  James  Thomesoune  and 
many  moe  of  the  bretheren. 

The  sam  day  according  the  former  act  of  recommenda'une  to  everie  Reporte 
deackone  to  conveine  his  calling  and  to  try  what  they  will  bestow  wpon  the  ^^^'=''°"^s- 
downe  taking  and  building  wp  againe  the  sd  hospitall  compeired  the  deackones 
of  the  hammermen  tailzeors  cordouneres  weiferes  chirurgianes  maissounes 
visitur  of  maltmen  the  deackones  of  the  wrightes  skinneres  cowpers  fleshoures 
and  the  visitur  of  the  garneres  and  decleared  that  thair  haill  bretheren  of  the 
repive  callinges  war  most  wilhng  according  to  thair  power  to  advance  money 
and  to  contrabute  for  the  accompleshing  of  the  foirsd  work. 

The   sam   day   recommendes    to   James   Colquhoune   Thomas   Campbell  Anent  the 
Manasses  Lyll  Patrick  Bryce  maltman  Patrick  Bryce  weifer  with  Johne  Hall  the  hc«pitall. 
the  deackones  of  hammermen  and  tailzeores  to  meit  and  conveine  the  best 
maissounes  and  wrightes  for  drawing  the  forme  and  draught  of  the  hows  and 
q'  the  building  thairof  will  draw  to  and  to  report  the  nixt  melting. 

The  same  day  appoyntes  Thomas  Campbell  and  Patrick  Bryce  maltmen  Stewart. 
to  goe  alonges  with  the  deackone  conveiner  for  speiking  with  Jonat  Stewart 
anent  the  buying  in  from  her  of  her  lyferent  landes  neir  the  hospital. 


400 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1664 


Warrand. 


Twa  bands 
put  in  box. 


Deackon 

conveiner  to 
subscryve  the 
GorbeU  takes. 


The  same  day  ordaines  the  coUectore  to  give  to  Robert  Hodgzard  tanner 
for  supplie  xxx  li  and  that  be  paying  four  ]Hmd  per  weik  and  noe  vvther  wayes. 

Dccimo  Feberitarij  1665. 
The  qlk  day  the  deackone  conveiner  withe  deackones  of  hammermen 
tailzeors  baxters  weifers  chirurgianes  skinners  fleshours  the  visitour  of  maltmen 
and  oversman  of  the  garneres  ther  was  produced  two  bands  the  on  grantit 
be  the  Laird  of  Hargray  and  his  cauner  conteining  thrie  hunderethe  markes 
and  the  wther  grantit  be  Johne  Scheills  and  Wilham  Scheills  and  thair  cauner 
conteining  thrie  hunderethe  and  fyftie  markes  qlks  twa  bands  wer  delyvered 
to  the  collectour  and  thairafter  wer  put  in  the  box. 

Decimo  quarto  Febrij  1665. 
Conveined  the  deackone  conveiner  witlr   Bailhe  Ker  Manassas 
Lyll  Johne  Hall  Thomas  Campbell  as  also  the  deackones  of  hammer- 
men baxters  wrightes  maissones  chirurgians  tailzeors  William  Boyd 
and  visitour  of  garneres. 

The  sd  day  ther  was  full  power  and  commissionne  gi\'en  to  Walter 
Neilsoune  deackone  conveiner  that  he  for  himself  and  in  name  of  the  remanent 
deackones  of  crafts  sould  subscryve  any  tackes  that  wer  to  be  sub'  in  favores 
of  any  persone  of  the  craftes  pairt  of  the  lands  of  Gorballs. 


.Anent  The  sd  day  ordaines  the  deackons  to  convein  thair  repive  crafts  and  to 

the  hospUaii.    ^r}"  and  sie  quhat  they  would    give  to  help  to  advance  the  building  of    the 
hospitall  and  to  mak  thair  report  thairanent  againest  Saturday  nixt. 

Decimo  sexto  Febrij  1665. 
Conveined  Walter  Neilsoune  deackon  conveiner  with  him  Baillie 
Ker  Thomas  Campbell  Johne  Hall  Patrick  Bryc  malt.  Johne  Scot 
baxter  with  the  deackones  of  tailzeors  chirurgians  co\\pers  maissouns 
fleshoures  and  visitour  of  gamers. 


Submissoune 
Leaper  and 
his  prenteis. 


This  day  the  debait  betwixt  Johne  Leaper  and  Alex''  Lang  his  prenteis 
with  his  cauner  was  submitted  for  the  sd  Johne  Leaper  to  Thomas  Campbell 
and  Patrick  Bryce  maltmen  and  for  the  pairt  of  the  prenties  and  his  cauer 
was  submitted  to  Manasses  Lyll  and  Johne  Maxwell  deackon  of  the  hammermen 
and  they  ar  to  determeine  thairintill  betwixt  and  the  first  of  Maij  nixt  and  in 
caice  of  variance  they  have  power  to  mak  choyse  of  ane  oversman  and  the 
pairties  ar  obleist  to  stand  thairat  wnder  the  paine  of  ane  hunderethe  punds 
by  and  attour  {)erformance  of  the  sentance. 

Anent  the  The  sd  day  ordaines  zet  Thomas  Campbell  Johne  Hall  Patrick  Bryce 

thc'hospitall.     maltman  and  Patrick  Bryce  weifer  to  speik  zet  to  \Mlliam  Boyd  or  any  vvther  of 

the  maissones  to  sie  qt  they  will  tak  to  build  the  hospitall  according  to  the  draught 

thairof  allreddie  drawne  or  after  any  wther  draght  that  sail  be  thought  fitting. 


1665]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  401 

Decimo  Marti j  1665. 

Conveined  Walter  Neilsoune  deackon  conveiner  with  Baillie  Ker 
Manasses  LyU  as  also  the  deackons  of  hammermen  weifers  baxters 
fleshours  skinneres  tailzeors  covvpers  wrights  bonnetmakers  the 
visitour  of  garners  Johne  Cors  and  Robert  Findlay. 

The  sd  day  in  answer  to  ane  complent  given  in  be  sum  of  the  cowperes  Anent  the 
against  present  deackone  of  cowperes  and  his  maisters  regraiting  that  when  '^°^^P'^'^^- 
they  wer  maid  friemen  with  the  caUing  althoe  they  v\er  friemens  sones  ther 
was  too  much  exacted  aff  them  ther  being  no  constant  pryce  sett  downe  thair- 
anent  of  befor  qlk  being  considdered  wpon  be  pluralitie  of  wotes  it  was  statute 
and  ordained  that  saxteine  pund  sail  be  all  that  sail  be  exacted  heirafter  fra 
any  entering  frieman  of  the  lyk  qualitie  as  burges  and  friemens  soons  and  that 
the  pnt  deackone  and  maisters  of  craft  sett  downe  ane  act  thairanent  in  ther 
book  therin  to  stand  as  ane  law  and  statut  in  all  tyme  coming  for  that  effect. 

The  sd  day  it  being  regreated  that  sum  persones  heirtofoir  for  ther  awne  Sum  %vrightes 
pemitious  ends  hes  sought  the  subscriptiones  of  sum  of  ther  bretherin  of  ther  suVpqjers.'^ 
repive  callings  to  sum  pepers  tending  to  seditioune  and  stryff  amongest  the 
bretherin  of  thair  repive  calhngs  and  thairfor  it  is  statut  and  ordained  that 
the  lyk  be  not  fund  heirafter  and  wnlawes  and  fynes  Johne  and  Alex''  Danizells 
Neill  M'Cuir  Gabriell  Cumyng  Thomas  Miller  William  Liddell  Johne  Scot 
Johne  Otterburne  Robert  Dickie  William  Selkrig  Malcom  Scot  Johne  Dickie 
Johne  Stevinsoune  and  James  Forsyeth  wrights  and  ilk  ane  of  them  in  twa 
dollors  for  doing  of  the  lyk  ag'  Alex""  Eglingtone  y''  deacone  to  be  exacted  aff 
them  for  the  vse  of  the  hows  and  poor  therintill  qlks  they  could  not  deny  being 
all  pnt. 

The  sam  day  it  is  appoynted  that  Robert  Reid  in  Drygait  keep  that  kie  Wrightes. 
of  the  wrightes  bo.x  till  Michaellmes  nixt  qch  James  Reid  had  and  recoiuends 
the  deackes  of  tailzeors  weifers  skinners  maissouns  with  the  box  mH  of  the 
wrights  to  visit  the  wrights  box  that  no  wrong  hes  bein  don  thairto  be  the 
deackon  and  thes  qho  wer  with  him  when  they  took  out  the  thrie  hunderetli 
mark  to  lend  to  Camstroden. 

Vigesimo  octavo  Marcij  1665. 

This  day  conveined  the  deackone  conveiner  and  deackones  of  craftes  Cowpers. 
with  the  bretherine  of  thair  counsell  qho  for  the  most  pairt  wer  pnt  in  answer 
to  the  severall  complentes  given  in  befor  them  be  the  deackone  of  the  covvpers 
and  divers  of  his  bretherin  of  calUng  against  Johne  Gemmill  cowper  and  be 
the  sd  Johne  againest  them  in  answer  after  considera^une  hard  thairanent 
it  was  wnanimouslie  concludit  that  the  deackone  of  cowpers  or  sum  for  him 

2B 


402 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1665 


goe  to  Dumbartane  with  the  sd  Johne  Gemmill  and  buy  thair  the  rest  of  the 
staves  zet  onsold  and  thes  with  the  thrie  thousand  fyve  hundereth  girthes 
alreddie  bought  be  the  sd  Johne  Gemmill  to  be  equallie  devydit  amongest  the 
haill  calling  and  give  ther  be  non  at  Dumbartane  for  to  be  boughte  ordaines 
Gemmill  to  de\yd  his  girthes  amongest  the  calling  they  paying  him  therfor 
with  his  haill  charges. 

Q II  into  Apr  His  1665. 
Cowpers.  The  sd  day  being  conveined  the  deackone  conveiner  with  the  deackones 

of  craftes  and  thair  bretherine  of  counsell  who  for  the  most  pairt  wer  pnt 
anent  the  complent  given  in  against  Johne  Gemmill  be  the  cowpers  the  sd 
Johne  Gemmill  submittit  himself  to  Thomas  Campbell  and  Johne  Hall  baiUies 
and  the  rest  of  the  deackones  for  his  fyne  in  buying  of  runges  in  Dumbartone 
for  tymes  by  past  and  is  content  to  submitt  himself  to  the  cowjieres  for  tymes 
coming  as  what  actes  sail  be  set  downe  be  the  deackones  thairanent  wnder  the 
paine  of  fourtie  pundes  to  be  applyet  for  the  vse  of  ther  poor  and  that  all  the 
co\\pers  entered  and  to  be  entered  friemen  sail  subscrj-ve  thes  actes  that  is 
to  say  that  non  of  them  sail  buy  mnges  abrod  aither  in  burghe  or  landwart 
but  w  hat  sail  be  a  commoune  bargane  to  the  haill  tred. 

Decimo  tertio  April  is  1665. 
The  sam   day  Androw  Bryssoune  sone  lawll  to   Wilham   Bryssoune  in 
Hillhead  is  booked  prenteis  with  Alexander  Danizell  wheill  wright  for  the 
space  of  seavine  zeirs  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeir  for  meit  and  fie  conform  to  the 
indentour  daited  the  fyftine  day  of  Julij  last  bj'  past. 

Decimo  sexto  Maij  1665. 
Cowpers.  The  sd  day  the  deackone  conveiner  with  the  deackons  of  crafts  and  thair 

bretherine  of  counsell  being  conveined  qlio  for  the  most  pairt  wer  pnt  in 
rela'une  to  ane  former  arte  sett  downe  anent  the  cowpers  its  ordained  that 
all  staves  girthes  stepes  and  wthers  of  that  kind  imported  at  the  Broomelaw 
be  made  ane  commoune  bargane  amongest  the  haill  calling  and  each  brother 
to  have  his  cavell  thairof  provyding  that  he  who  payes  not  for  his  cavell  or 
is  awne  anything  for  former  cavells  at  the  divisioune  shall  have  non  at  all 
for  that  tyme  as  also  he  that  will  not  tak  his  cavell  evill  or  good  as  it  falls  out 
being  lawllie  warned  sail  have  non  in  all  tyme  thairafter. 

Coliectour.  The  sd  day  ordaines  the  collectour  to  tak  one  sub'  not  from  Ritchard 

Ronnald  for  t\\entie  pund  qlk  he  was  awn  foitnerlie  to  Johne  Thomesone 
hillman  of  the  Eister  Hewghes  and  was  assignit  be  him  to  the  vse  of  the  poor. 

Maissounes.  The  sd  day  in  answer  to  the  desyer  gi\'en  in  be  the  deackone  of  the  maissouns 

for  himself  and  in  neame  of  his  bretherine  of  calling  craveing  that  qtsomever 
skleaters  not  frie  with  ther  calling  w  ithin  this  burghe  that  they  ether  enter 


Prenteis 
Brvssoune. 


i665]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  403 

frieman  with  them  or  els  work  throw  thair  priveledge  and  tollerance  conform 
to  the  priveledge  they  have  be  thair  Ire  of  deackonehead  the  sds  maissouns 
wer  desyered  to  petitioune  the  counsell  thairanent  and  to  seik  ther  ratifica'une 
thairto. 

This  sam  day  the  complent  gi\en  in  be  the  wrightes  againest  James  Gib  Wrights. 
is  remitted  to  Baillie  Ker  and  to  sie  all  actes  formerlie  sett  downe  against 
him  to  be  put  to  executioune. 

Ordaines  the  collectour  to  give  to  David  Calderwood  ane  dollo''.  Warrand. 

Quinto  Aprilis  1665. 
The  sd  day  anent  the  complent  given  in  againest  Johne  Gemmill  be  the  Cowpers. 
cowpers  the  sd  Johne  Gemmill  submittit  himself  to  Thomas  Campbell  Johne 
Hall  baillies  and  the  rest  of  the  deackones  for  his  fyne  in  buying  ranges  in 
Dumbartane  for  tymes  by  past  and  is  content  to  submitt  himself  to  the  cowpers 
for  tymes  coming  and  qt  actes  sail  be  set  downe  be  the  deackones  thairanent 
wnder  the  paine  of  fourtie  pundes  to  be  applyed  for  the  vse  of  thair  poor  and 
that  all  the  cowpers  entered  and  to  be  entered  friemen  sail  subscryve  thes 
actes  that  is  to  say  that  non  of  them  sail  buy  ranges  abrod  aither  in  burghe 
or  landwart  but  qt  sail  be  a  comoun  bargane  to  the  haill  tred. 

Duodecimo  Aiignstj  1665. 
The  sd  day  the  deackone  conveiner  with  the  deackones  of  crafts  who  for 
the  most  pairt  war  put  they  appojTitit  Thomas  Campbell  Johne  Hall  the 
visitour  of  maltmen  the  deackone  of  the  tailzeoures  Patrick  Bryce  maltman 
Patrick  Bryce  weaver  and  deackon  of  the  hammermen  to  convein  and  cast 
wp  the  compt  of  the  Gorball  rent  for  the  crope  1664  and  q*  everie  thousand 
mark  the  craftes  his  laying  theron  will  gett  thairby. 

Decimo  quinto  August]  1665. 
The  qlk  day  Walter  Neilsoune  deackone  conveiner  with  the  deackones  Report  from 
of  hammermen  tailzeours  ba.xters  weifers  skinners  fleshoures  cowpers  bonnet-  ^'  conveenet^ 
makeres  wrights  chirurgianes  and  with  them  Manasses  Lj'll  William  Boyd  '"  y°  dea"" 
Thomas  Campbell  Patrick  Bryce  maltman   [convened].      The   sam  day  the  augmentatioQ 
forsd  Walter  Neilsoune  deackone  conveiner  made  report  that  thair  was  ane  °|  aiif''"^^^^ 
overto''  proponit  in  counsell  whither  it  was  better  for  the  towne  to  be  stentit 
for  paj'ment  of  its  pairt  of  the  great  stent  grantit  to  his  magestie  in  his  last 
conventioune  of  estates  or  to  lay  fyve  schilling  of  excyse  wpon  ilk  mask  of 
malt  mor  nor  befor  and  that  for  the  space  of  fyve  yeires  allenerhe  and  that 
he    was    desyred  to  convein  the  deackones  and  to  desyre  them  to  conveine 
thair  severall  craftes  for  to  give  thair  resolutioune  heirintill  and  yrfor    he 
desyred  them  to  doe  the  samyne  accordinglie  qlk  they  promitted  to  doe  with 
the  first  convenient  diligence. 


404  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1665 

Decimo  nono  Augustj  1665. 
Report  of  y*  Cont^eined  the  deackone  conveiner  with  the  deackones  of  hammermen 

deac"  to  y 

d.  conveener.  tailzeours  baxters  cordowneres  maissounes  wrights  cowperes  weifers  chirur- 
gians  fleshours  visitour  of  gamers  and  Patrick  Bryc  maltman.  The  sam  day 
the  afoirsd  \\'alter  Neilsoune  deackon  conveiner  desyered  ane  answer  to  his 
last  propositioune  proponit  wpon  the  fyftine  of  this  instant  anent  the  matter 
of  stent  and  the  haill  deackones  pnt  maid  report  that  they  had  conveined  the 
haill  trades  and  several!  corpora"  unes  thairanent  and  conferred  and  con- 
sultit  with  them  thairintill  and  declared  that  it  was  agried  wpon  be  them  all 
that  ther  sould  be  five  shilhng  scots  of  excj'se  laid  wpon  the  maske  of  malt 
mor  nor  it  payed  formerlie  and  that  to  be  collectit  and  applyed  for  the  townes 
pairt  of  the  sd  stent  rether  nor  the  inhabitantes  should  be  stentit  yrfor  pro- 
vyding  it  lay  noe  farder  on  nor  fyve  zeires  and  that  all  pay  the  excyse  that  ar 
lyable  and  give  that  stent  be  taken  of  befor  the  expyering  of  the  sd  fyve  zeires 
that  the  sd  fyve  schilling  sail  be  also  takine  of  and  puttin  out  of  the  way. 

]'igesimo  sexto  Augustj  1665. 
This  da}'  Thomas  CampbeU  Johne  Hall  the  deackons  of  hammermen 
and  tailzeoures  with  the  collectour  being  according  to  ordour  conveined  for 
casting  wp  of  the  compt  of  the  rent  of  the  Gorballs  for  the  crope  1664  and  the 
rent  yrof  extending  to  ane  hundereth  twentie  nyne  bolles  beir  pryce  yrof 
conforme  to  the  feir  four  pund  ten  shilling  and  sua  extends  to  in  money  fyve 
hundereth  four  scoir  pundes  ten  shillings  of  the  qlk  thair  is  to  be  rebaited 
for  the  collectors  paines  twentie  fyve  markes  sua  rests  to  be  devyded  in  threttie 
ane  pairtes  fyve  hunderethe  thrie  scoir  thrie  pundes  xvj  s.  ten  pennies  and  sua 
rests  to  be  payed  for  everie  thousand  markes  aughtine  pundes  iij  s.  ten  pennis. 
Item  the  teindes  of  the  sds  lands  for  the  forsd  crope  1664  being  in  haill  fourtine 
hunderethe  markes  the  crafts  pairt  thairof  extends  to  twa  hunderethe  threttie 
thrie  pundes  vij  s.  viij  d.  Aff  this  thair  is  to  be  rebaited  qlk  is  to  be  given 
to  the  colledge  collectour  for  the  craftes  pairt  of  the  tein  tak  dewtie  of  the  sds 
lands  of  Gorbells  thrie  scoir  twelf  punds  and  sua  ther  rests  to  be  devyded  in 
threttie  ane  ptes  ane  hunderethe  thrie  scoir  ane  pundes  vj  s.  viij  d.  and  everie 
thousand  markes  falles  of  this  fyve  pund  four  shilling  and  sua  everie  thousand 
mark  falles  for  the  ferme  and  teind  of  the  sds  lands  of  the  sd  crope  twentie 
thrie  pund  vj  s.  viij  d.  and  ther  is  fourtie  shilling  farder  of  od  monej'  qlk  is 
given  to  the  off""  Robert  Adame. 

Vndecimo  Odobris  1665. 
The  qlk  day  Walter  Neilsoune  deackone  conveiner  with  the  deackones 
of  crafts  and  thair  bretherin  of  counsell  being  conveined  for  choysen  two  of 
thair  number  to  be  choysen  and  to  be  pntit  with  the  sd  Walter  Neilsoune  pnt 
deackone  conveiner  to  the  provest  baillies  and  counsell  of  this  burghe  and 
wtheres  havand  entres  to  the  effect  that  one  of  them  might  be  choysen  deackone 


i665]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


405 


conveiner  for  ane  zeir  to  com  be  pluralitie  of  votes  thes  persones  following 
viz  Johne  Ker  and  Manasses  Lyll  wer  made  choyse  of  to  be  pntit  with  the 
sds  Walter  Neilsoune  to  the  magistrats  and  counsell  to  the  effect  abovewrytine 
and  wthers  havand  entres. 

Thairafter  the  sd  Walter  Neilsoune  v\as  continued  deackon  conveiner. 


Duodecimo  Octobris. 

Thir  persones  following  ar   choysen  to  be  one  the  deackone  conveiners 
counsell. 

Deackones 


Alex^  Jafray 
Robert  Caruthers 
James  Mitchell 
Daniel  Purdowne 
Johne  Falconer 
Wm  Clydsdaill 
Johne  Clark 

Johne  Miller  bailzea 


Johne  Miller  visitor 
James  Reid 
Androw  Love 
Ro*  Findlay 
James  Gilmo"" 
Niniane  Spens 


Johne  Ma.xwell 
Alexander  Gowean 
Johne  Love 
Androw  Purdowne 
Alexander  Blak 

Johne  Ker 
James  Davidsoune 
Johne  Ma.xwell 
William  Jonstoune 
James  Fergusoune 

Gabriell  Corbett 
James  Waddrop 
Johne  Listoune 
James  Thomesone 
Johne  Wood 

Alexander  Eghngtowne 
Gabriel  Cumyng 

Manasses  Lyll 
W"i  Gowean 

Johne  Robisoune 
James  Smithe 


W™  Glen 
Thomas  Scot 

Patrick  Brj'ce 
Johne  Clark 
David  Pitcairne 

James  Thomesone 

W™  Boyd 
Ro'  Boyd  yo' 

Thomas  Campbell 
Walter  Bryce 
Patrick  Bryce 
Johne  Watsoune 
Johne  Wallace 

George  Broom 
Michael  Gilmof 

Johne  Walker 

Johne  Bartowne 
James  Heriot 


4o6  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1665 

Decimo  septimo  Novemhris  1665. 

The  qlk  day  the  deackone  conveiner  with  the  deackons  of  craftes  and  thair 
bretherine  of  counsell  being  conveined  qho  for  the  most  pairt  wer  pnt  Patrick 
Bryce  thair  last  collecto""  made  his  compt  of  his  haill  intromissioune  with  the 
mone}-es  and  rentes  belonging  to  the  sd  hospitall  sine  the  tyme  he  was  admittit 
collecto""  and  of  his  dibursments  of  the  same  qrof  charge  and  discharge  is  as 
follows  and  first  the 

Charg. 
In  the  first  receaved  be  him  fra  the  lait  collecto''  y'  was  restand 

in  his  hand  at  the  making  of  his  compt       .  .  .     3S8     3     4 

Item  receaved  for  burgess  silver  at  that  same  tyme         .  .       29  12     o 

Item  receaved  fra  Johne  Miller  baillie  and  leat  deackone  conveiner 

as  the  benefeit  of  some  seek  .  .  .  .      120     o     o 

Item  receaved  for  the  benefeit  of  some  irone  was  brought  in  wpon 

ventur  from   Ireland  .  .  .  .       17     8     0 

Item  receaved  fra  wmqell  Johne  Bars  cafier  qlk  he  was  awand  to 

the  hows  be  band    100  ll    priiill  and  6  1i  of    penaltie    fra 

Lambmes  1664  to  Witsonday  1665  .  .  .      106     0     o 

Item  receaved  fra  Ro'  Carutheres  for  twa  zeires  and  ane  halfe 

arent  of  400  markes  from  Witsonday  1662  to  Martimes  1664  40  0  0 
Item  receaved  fra  David  Miller  for  ane  zeirs  arent  of  500  merks 

fra  Martimes  1663  to  Martimes  1664  .  .  .       20     o     0 

Item  receaved  fra  Alexander  Gowan  for  ane  zeirs  arent  of  100 

markes  fra  j\Iartimes  1663  to  Martimes  1664  .  .         400 

Item  receaved  fra  Androw  King  in  Pollokshawes  for  the  arent  of 

ane  1000  markes  fra  Witsonday  1664  to  Witsonday  1665  .  40  o  o 
Item  receaved  fra  W™  Andersoune  pro  vest  for  the  an  vail  of  500 

markes  fra  Witsonday  1664  to  Witsonday  1665       .  .       20     o     o 

Item  for  the  howss  pairt  of  the  Gorball  rent  of  8000  markes  at 

23  ll  6s.  8d.  per  1000  for  the  crope  1664       .  .  .     186  13     4 

Item  from  James   Patersoune  for  ane  zeirs  maill  of  ane  laigh 

hows  as  being  ane  pairt  of  wmqell  James  Duncanes  land  from 

Witsonday  1664  to  Witsonday  1665  .  .  .       22     o     o 

Item  receaved  fra  James  Morosounes  tenent  in  Gorballs  and  qlk 

sould  hae  bein  payit  to  David  Robisoune  y*  zeir  that  he  was 

collector         .  .  .  .  .  .  .       15     8     4 

Item  receaved  bak  fra  the  colledge  collecto''  as  ane  p*  of  y*  qlk 

was  debursit  for  the  crafts  p'  of  the  teinds  of  Gorballs  .       12     0     o 

Item  receaved  fra  sea\'ine  new  deackones  for  thair  sword  money       56     o     0 
Item  receaved  fra  the  deackones  for  thair  quarter  compts  .     206     6     8 

Summa  (jf  the  charge  is        .  .  .  .   1283  11     8 


iS 

0 

0 

II 

I 

4 

14 

0 

0 

0 

6 

0 

2 

I 

6 

20 

0 

0 

6 

0 

0 

20 

0 

0 

1665]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  407 

Discharge. 

In  the  first  debursit  to  tlie  sex  poor  men  in  the  hospitall  .     288     o     o 

Item  for  eleveine  nionethes  coles  with  30s.  was  given  to  James 

Weinzet  the  tyme  he  was  seik  .... 

Item  for  the  mens  shoes  in  the  hows      .... 
Item  for  y''  shirtes  at  6s.  8d.  the  ell       . 

Item  for  ane  riddell  to  the  hows  .... 

Item  for  dailies  nailles  and  ane  look  to  the  ambrie  and  warkmen- 

shipe  to  mend  the  stair  ..... 
Item  to  Robert  Adam  off  for  his  hall  .... 
Item  debursit  to  him  at  Lambmes  be  the  deackon  conveiner  and 

deackons  ordour  ..... 

Item  to  the  clerk  for  his  hall       ..... 
Item  debursit  to  Charles  PoUok  lor  his  supphe  at  the  deackone 

conveiners  comand  ..... 

Item  debursit  to  Johne  Clark  lor  ane  ambrie  yt  he  put  wp  in  James 

Duncans  land  ...... 

Item  for  ane  pairt  of  ane  swie  trie  y''       . 

Item  debursit  to  the  deackon  conveiners  wife  for  some  expenss 

he  with  some  of  the  deackones  was  w*  M^  Androw  Burnet  q" 

some  papers  in  the  box  was  looked 
Item  to  Androw  Cottes  at  the  deackon  conveiners  comand 
Item  to  Ro'  Adame  to  give  to  thrie  towne  off"  at  the  deackones 

choisen  at   the  deackon  conveiners  coiTiand 
Item  to  ane  stranger  woman  at  the  deackone  conveiners  ordour 
Item  debursit  wpon  supplica^unes  at  Haloumes  court  to  severall 

as  thair  warand  beires  .  .  .  .  .       24  i8 

Item  to  Gabriell  Conynghames  rehct  wpon  her  discharge  for  the 

zeir   1664  ...... 

Item  debursit  to  her  for  the  zeir  1665  wpon  her  discharge 

Item  to  Robert  Hodgzaird  according  to  his  warand 

Item  to  W""  Braidie  on  his  discharge       .... 

Item  to  David  Calderwood  for  his  supplie 
Item  to  Ro'  Hodgzaird  according  to  his  warrand 
Item  for  the  craftes  borsour  to  the  colledge  factour  as  his  dis- 
charge  beires  .  .  .  .  .  .         66  13    4 

Item  lent  at  Martimes   1664  to  William  and  Johne  Sheilles  in 

Gorballs  conforme  to  y''  band  put  in  box  at  Candellmes  court     233     6     8 
Item  lent  at  Martimes  the  sd  zeir  to  Hardgray  conforme  to  his 

band  put  in  box  at  that  tj'me  ....     200    o     o 

Summa  of  the  discharge  is 

ane  thousand  three  scoir  aleveine  pundes  fyftine  shilling. 


I 

16 

0 

0 

12 

0 

2 

7 

8 

0 

12 

0 

0 

12 

0 

I 

0 

0 

8 

10 

0 

8 

10 

0 

30 

0 

0 

20 

0 

0 

2 

18 

0 

12 

0 

0 

4o8 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1665 


Bryce 

continued 
coUecto'. 


Money 
continued  in 
the  collecto's 
hands. 


Tak  Corbett. 


Warrand  for 
some  poor. 


Band  King. 


Band 
Uuncane. 

Govean. 


MiUer. 


Andersoune 


And  sua  charge  and  discharge  being  compeared  thair  restes  in  the 
compters  hand  twa  hundereth  allevine  pundes  xvj  s.  viij  d.  qlk  is 
ordained  to  be  delyvered  to  the  subsequent  collecto''  and  he  to  be 
chargit  thairwith. 

The  sam  day  be  pluraUtie  of  \otts  the  sd  Patrick  Bryce  last  collecto''  is 
continued  of  new  againe  collecto"'  for  ane  zeir  to  come  quho  being  put  did 
accept  and  give  his  oath  as  vse  is  and  besyd  the  forsd  twa  hunderethe  allevine 
pundes  xvj  s.  viij  d.  he  hes  in  his  hand  he  hes  farder  instantlie  receaved  the 
burgess  silver  y*  was  collectit  the  last  zeir  and  thrie  dollo''s  that  was  gottine 
from  ane  stranger  y'  brought  in  som  ventar  iron  from  Ireland  extending  in 
haill  to  fyftie  four  pundes  xiiij  s.  and  he  is  to  be  chargit  thairwith  at  the  making 
of  his  compt. 

Decimo  octavo  Noveinbris  1665. 

Conveined  the  deackone  conveiner  and  with  him  Jo°  Miller  baillie 
Johne  Ker  lait  bailUe  with  the  deackones  of  hamermen  tailzeours 
cordouners  visitor  of  maltmeii  deackone  of  \^eavers  skiners  chirur- 
gians  baxters  wrights  visitour  of  gardiners. 

This  day  W'"^  Corbetts  tak  of  his  lands  in  Gorballs  w  as  sighted  and  visitit 
and  put  in  the  box  and  yr  was  addit  to  it  that  peac  land  called  the  Botili- 
knowis  for  the  qlk  he  is  to  pay  zeirhe  fourtie  shilling  and  it  is  awuand  now 
for  yis  last  zear. 

The  sd  day  ordaines  the  collector  to  pay  in  to  the  persones  following  for 
thair  supphe  xxxvj  s.  \iz  to  Charles  Pollock  cov\'per  W""  Boyd  to  the  relict 
of  wmqell  Eliezar  Hammiltone  Da\id  Calderwood  James  Clark  cuitler  Margaret 
Lykpirik  Thomas  Black  and  Thomas  Raltoune  according  as  the  deacon 
cyveiner  be  himself  sail  give  ordour  to  the  clerk.     . 

Follows  the  catallogc  of  the  bands  belonging  to  the  hospitall. 

In  the  first  thair  is  adebtit  be  .\ndrow  King  in  PoUokshawis  to  the  poor  in 

the  sd  hospitall  1000  marks  for  the  qlk  they  stand  ini'eft  in  his  lands  in 

Trongait  and  the  arent  thairof  is  awand  sen  Witsonday  1665. 
Item  wmqell  James  Duncane  brassmithe  was  awand  to  the  sd  hospitall  1000 

markes  in  securitie  qrof  the  poor  stands  infeft  in  his  lands  in  Saltmarcat. 
Item  ane  band  grantit  be  Ale.x''  Gowane  containing  ane  100  markes  qrof  ther 

is  ane  zeirs  arent  awuand  at  Martimes  1665. 
Item  ane  band  grantit  be  David  Miller  merchand  conteining  the  sowme  of 

500  markes  qrof  ther  is  ane  zeirs  arent  awuand  at  Martimes  1665. 
Item  ane  band  grantit  be  W""  Andersoune  provest  conteining  the  sowme  of 

500  markes  qrof  thair  will  be  half  ane  zeirs  arent  awuand  at  Martimes 

1665. 


i665]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  409 

Item  ane  band  grantit  be  Robert  Caruthers  tailzeour  and  his  cauers  conteining  Carutheres. 

the  sowmc  of  400  niarkes  qrof  the  arent  is  awuand  sen  Martimes  1664. 
Item  ane  band  grantit  be  Johne   Miller  tailzeour  lait    deackone   conveiner  Miller. 

conteining  the  sowme  of  400  markes  qrof  the  arent  is  awand  sen  Martimes 

1662. 
Item  awuand  be   Robert   Hunter  of  Whytsyd  and  his  cauers  seavintie  ane    Hunter. 

pundes  x  s.  as  being  the  equall  half  of  the  priiill  sowme  conteined  in  his 

band  qrof  thair  is  sundrie  zeires  arent  awxiand  but  he  lies  suspendit  the 

charge  given  for  y'  effect. 
Item  wmqell  Edward  Harriiltone  of  Silvertow  nhill  being  awand  to  wmqell  Hammiltoune. 

Androw    Mylne  fourtie  pundes   the  band    grantit    thairfor  was    drawne 

wp  in  name  of  wmqell  Johne  Selkrig  and  he  at  the  desire  of  the  sd  wmqell 

Androw  Mylne  assignit  the  same  to  the  hospitall  qlk  could  never  zit  be 

gottine. 
Item  David   Robisoune  beltmaker  zet  is  awuand  y'  qlk  was  restand  in  his   Robesoune. 

hand    at    the    making    of    his    compt    extending    to    threttie    pundes 

vij  s.  iiij  d. 
Item  awand  be  William  and  Johne  Sheilles  in  Gorballs  and  yr  cauer  350  markes  Sheiiles. 

qrof  the  arent  is  awand  sen  Martimes  1664. 
Item  awand  be  the  Laird  of  Hardgray  and  his  cauer  300  markes  qrof  the  arent  Hardgray. 

is  awuand  sen  Martimes  1664. 

Qiiinio  Decembris  1665. 

The  qlk  day  Walter  Neilsoune  deacon  cyveiner  v\ith  ye  deacones  of  Decreit 
hamermen  cordoners  tailzeo^s  baxters  chyrurgianes  gairners  coupers  wrights  '^'''^^'''^'• 
skinners  flesho'"s  and  bonetmakers  being  conveined  in  the  craftis  hospitall 
anent  the  supplica'une  given  in  and  persewit  befor  y"'  be  Gawine  Philpshill 
coujier  and  \\'alter  Whyt  mer''  burges  of  this  burgh  his  cau""  against  Jonet 
Steill  relict  of  vmq"  James  Andersoune  couper  burges  yof  and  Ro'  Findlay 
pnt  deacon  of  ye  sd  coupers  his  cautiouner  mackand  mentioune  that  q''  according 
to  ane  indenter  made  betwixt  the  sd  vmq"  James  Andersoune  and  ye  sd 
Gawine  Philpshill  daitit  the  xxv  of  Feb'''^  1663  ye  sd  Gawine  was  bund  to 
serve  the  sd  James  Andersoune  seavine  3eares  as  prenteis  and  the  sd  vmq" 
James  was  bund  to  instruct  him  in  all  poynts  of  his  tred  and  it  having  pleased 
God  to  remove  ye  sd  vmq"  James  out  of  this  mortall  lyfe  about  ane  year  syne 
or  yby  after  his  entrie  to  him  trew  it  is  and  of  veritie  that  noHv'standing  it  is 
the  ordo''  and  custome  of  ye  sd  tred  that  q"  the  mr  dies  the  prenteis  is  to  have 
ane  sufficient  tradsman  set  over  him  y'  is  ane  frieman  to  teach  him  ye  tyme  y' 
is  to  ran  of  his  indenter  in  the  relict  her  charges  zit  the  sd  compleinar  ne\er 
got  any  man  to  teach  him  sine  his  deceas  qlk  is  ane  zeir  and  half  sen  or  yrby 
and  the  compleinar  finding  now  himself  much  prejudgit  to  the  loss  of  his  tred 
he  having  no  vyf  meane  of  lyfliehood  and  ha\eing  none  to  addres  himself 


410 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1665 


but  to  the  sd  deackone  conveiner  and  deackones  humblie  therfor  cravand 
their  wisdomes  to  considder  his  pnt  caice  he  having  payit  fourtie  pundes  of 
prenteis  fie  with  some  hnt  and  ane  bedding  of  cloathes  as  bountith  and  to 
deceme  the  sd  Jonet  to  discharge  him  of  farder  serving  her  and  y'  shoe  pay 
bak  to  him  a  pairt  of  the  sd  prenteis  fie  as  y''  wisdomes  sould  think  fit  and 
that  the  sd  compleinar  ha\e  hbertie  to  choj'se  ane  wther  new  master  of  the  sd 
tred  to  serve  vnder  dureing  the  tyme  of  the  indentour  zit  to  rune  as  they  can 
best  agrie  according  to  y"'  wisdomes  wyse  considera'une  and  actes  of  the 
deackon  conveiners  hows  observed  in  the  lyk  caices  as  the  supplica'une  and 
complent  mair  fulhe  proportes  qlk  being  red  the  sd  compleinar  with  the  forsd 
Walter  \\"hyt  his  cauer  and  the  sd  Jonet  Steill  defender  compeirand  be  Robert 
Young  her  sone  in  law  (who  gave  in  also  ane  bill  in  her  name  ag*  the  sd  com- 
pleinar) and  Robert  Findlaj-  the  vther  caiier  conteined  in  the  sd  indentour 
for  tlie  sd  defunct  thair  reasones  and  allega'unes  being  at  lenth  hard  be  the 
sd  deackone  conveiner  and  wthers  forsdes  after  mature  advyce  and  delibera^une 
had  \Tanent  did  conclude  that  the  forsd  James  Philpshill  prenteis  forsaid 
sould  serve  the  sd  Robert  Findlay  as  prenteis  dureing  the  tyme  of  his  sd 
prenteisshipe  zet  to  rune  conforme  to  the  sd  indentour  the  sd  Robert  instructing 
him  sulificientlie  conforme  thairto  and  ordaines  the  sd  Robert  wpon  y'  con- 
sidera-une  to  pay  to  the  sd  Jonet  Steill  twentie  pundes  scots  in  satisfactioune 
to  her  for  q'  shoe  can  clame  as  benefeit  by  the  sd  prenteis  wpon  ane  discharge 
to  be  sub'  be  her  to  him  and  to  the  sd  prenteis  thairof  as  also  ordaines  the  sd 
Robert  to  furnishe  the  sd  James  Philpshill  prenteis  ane  stand  of  new  cloathes 
with  hois  and  shoon  zeirhe  dureing  the  tyme  of  the  sd  prenteisshipe  zit  to  rune 
and  ordaines  also  the  sd  Jonet  Steill  and  the  aforsd  Ro'  Findlay  to  discharge 
the  sd  Walter  Whyt  of  his  obleisments  mentioned  in  the  sd  indentour  and  that 
with  consent  of  the  sd  Robert  Findlay  the  sd  Robert  Young  and  the  sd  James 
Philpshill  prenteis  and  y'  it  was  found  and  decleared  be  the  sd  deackone 
conveiner  and  deackones  forsd  that  the  sd  Robert  Findlay  being  caur  for  the 
sd  vmqll  James  and  ane  frieman  couper  and  burges  of  this  burghe  ought  to 
be  preferred  befor  any  wthers  and  that  the  sd  Robert  who  was  pnt  with  the 
sd  relict  did  admitt  and  was  content  of  the  sd  sentance  and  y*  the  sd  prenteis 
condeschended  thairto  alsua. 


Box  sighted. 
The  present 
deacon 
conveener 
departed  this 
life. 


Vigesimo  prima  Aprilis  1666. 

The  qlk  day  Walter  Neilsoune  leaf  deackon  conveiner  being  leatUe 
depearted  this  lyfe  Johne  Miller  ane  of  the  pnt  baillies  of  this  burghe  and  last 
deackone  conveiner  preceiding  the  sd  vmqll  Walter  with  the  deackons  of 
crafts  who  for  the  most  pairt  wer  present  and  the  bo.x  being  oppined  and 
finds  lyand  w'in  the  box  amongest  wther  wrytes  the  kinges  thrie  Irs  bot  the 
decreit  obtained  wpon  tire  rentall  and  the  seasing  of  James  Duncans  lands 
and  the  extract  of  the  Ire  of  gildrie  ar  amissing. 


i666]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  411 

Vltimo  Maij  1666. 

This  day  James  Miller  lawll  brother  to  Johne  Miller  in  Wester  Garscub  Miller 
is  booked  prenteis  with  William  Watsoune  tailzeour  in  his  craft  and  calling  p'^'^"'-'^'^- 
the  space  of  fj've  zeires  as  prenteis  and  twa  zeires  for  meit  and  fie  conforme 
to  the  indentour  daited  the  saxtine  day  of  October  1662  zeires. 

Quarto  J uiiij  i6bb. 
Con\  eined  Johne  Miller  baillie   and  leat  deackon  conveiner  with 
the  deackons  of  hammermen  tailzeors  cordouners  weivers  chyrurgians 
cowpers  fleshours  and  bonnetmakers. 

The  same  day  after  considera~une  had  of  the  bill  and  complent  given  in  Leisbman. 
be  Johne  Leishman  wright  ag*  Issobell  Scot  relict  of  vmq"  Johne  Aiken  wright 
his  maister  decerns  and  ordaines  the  sd  Issobell  to  sub*  and  delyver  to  the  sd 
Johne  ane  sufficient  discharge  of  his  prenteishipe  and  service. 

Tertio  Septembris  1666. 

The  qlk  daj'  Johne  Miller  lait  deackon  conveiner  and  now  ane  of  the  Report  Bryce 
pnt  baillies  of  this  burghe  being  conveined  in  the  craftes  hospitall  w*  the  '=°"'='^'°'- 
haill  threttine  deackones  except  thos  who  wer  absent  to  witt  the  deacones 
of  baxteres  coupers  and  fleshoures  w'  the  visitour  as  also  Manasses  Lyll  Jo" 
Ker  Thomas  Campbell  and  divers  otheres  of  the  bretherine  of  the  counsell 
Patrick  Bryce  coUecto'"  made  report  of  his  diligence  in  the  west  countrie  when 
he  read  to  Robert  Hunter  of  \Miytsyd  for  seiking  in  the  money  awand  be  him 
and  his  cauner  to  the  hospitall  qlk  is  as  followes  that  he  had  gottine  two  bandes 
ane  for  the  prinll  sowme  w*  ane  zeirs  arent  yrof  and  ane  wther  band  y'  the  sd 
Robert  sould  compt  for  four  zeires  arent  farder  qlk  was  alledgit  he  was  awand 
mor  nor  the  bygaine  arentes  qlks  ar  put  in  the  band  qlk  he  alleadgit  he  pa^'it 
to  vmq"  Niniane  Andersoune  collecto"'  and  it  is  fund  sen  syne  be  the  sd  vmq'' 
Niniane  his  compt  that  he  did  compt  for  threttie  pund  xvij  s.  qlk  he  had  payit 
to  the  sd  vmq"  Niniane  in  p'  payet  of  the  arentes  he  was  awand  for  the  tyme. 

The  same  day  appoyntes  Thomas  Campbell  Jo"  Ker  w'  the  deackones  of  Gorball  rent 
hammermen  and  cordouneres  to  cast  the  Gorball  compt  for  this  last  zeir  and  '°''«'=°^""s 
ordaines  the  collecto''  to  pay  evere  deacone  or  calling  y""  proportion  y''of  for  the 
sd  last  zeirs  rent  conforme  to  the  sd  cast  and  this  to  be  done  on  Thursday  nixt. 

The  same  day  in  anser  to  the  supplica^une  given  in  be  (  )  Watsoune 

Watsoune  sone  lavvll  to  vmq"  James  Watsoune  tailzeo""  burges  of  this  burghe  v^seni&- \iae. 
cravand  ane  presenta-une  to  that  vacant  place  of  burserie  in  the  colledge 
now  at  y''  gift  and  pnta^une  conforme  to  vmq"  M''  Jo"  Howie  [  ?  Howieson] 
his  mortifica'une  the  sds  persones  efter  considera'une  y''of  grantes  the  samyne 
and  ordaines  thair  clerk  to  sub'  to  him  ane  presenta'une  to  that  effect  and  to 
the  haill  fies  and  casualities  belonging  yrto  for  four  zeir  to  com. 


412 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


ri666 


Rent  of  the 
GorbaUs  for 
the  zeir  1665. 


vj  s.  to  be  The  same  day  the  sdes  psones  considering  the  great  paines  and  attendance 

deacoie  ^  qlk  Robert  Adame  y''  off''  makes  and  vnderstanding  the  fie  he  gates  y^'for  is 
cOTvemeres  verie  mean  it  is  thairi'or  this  day  concludit  that  he  sail  get  of  everie  craftes 
man  who  enters  burges  or  burges  and  gild  brother  heirefter  sax  shilling  scotes 
and  noe  farder  and  the  benefeit  of  this  also  to  redound  to  his  successores  off''^ 
to  the  craftes  gi\'e  the  deackon  conveiner  and  deacones  for  the  tyme  sail  think 
it  convenient. 

Sexto  Septembris  1666. 
The  qlk  [day]  thes  appojTited  to  meit  this  daj'  for  castine  of  the  Gorball 
rent  be  act  daitit  the  thrie  of  this  instant  being  conveined  the  haill  Gorball 
rent  being  wpon  the  last  crope  1665  zeires  being  calculated  and  laid  con  forme 
to  the  rentall  and  feires  and  qt  the  craftes  pairt  was  for  the  teindes  of  the  sd 
lands  the  sd  zeir  in  trie  money  the  ministers  stipend  being  payit  and  the  saxtine 
pund  reheated  dew  to  the  collecto"'  the  hailward  y''of  did  extend  to  eight 
hunderethe  thrie  scoir  twelf  pundes  xviij  s.  \'iij  d.  qlk  being  devydit  in 
threttie  ane  ptes  ther  falles  to  be  payit  to  everie  deackone  for  everie  thowsand 
mark  they  deburst  for  bying  the  landes  ot  Gorballes  twentie  pundes  3s.  2d. 
qlk  is  to  be  payit  conform  to  the  tenno''  of  the  sd  act. 

Memorandum.  It  is  appoynted  to  be  remembered  that  }•'  qlk  is  dew  to  be  payit  be  William 

Corbett  for  the  Botchmuir  is  not  zit  compted  for  and  it  is  sd  y*  the  haill  dewes 
yrof  is  awand  sine  he  gat  his  tak  subscryved. 


Clark  admittit 
to  the 
hospitall. 


Lyt  to  be 
pr««ntit  for 
the  electing 
deacon 
conveiner. 


Decimo  Septris  1666. 
The  qlk  day  Johne  Miller  ane  of  the  pnt  bailhes  of  this  burghe  and  leaf 
deacone  conveiner  \\'alter  Neilsoune  last  deacone  conveiner  being  depearted 
this  lyfe  with  the  deacons  of  hamermen  tailzeo''s  cordouners  weivers  baxters 
chyrurgians  fleshoi's  skinneres  and  Alex''  EglingtowTie  in  place  of  the  deceist 
deacone  of  wrightes  being  all  conveined  in  anser  to  the  supplica'une  given  in 
be  James  Clark  cuitler  cravand  to  be  admittit  in  thair  hospitall  in  place  of 
vmq"  Thomas  Naissmythe  bonnetmaker  efter  reeding  yrof  and  considera-une 
had  j-'anent  the  sd  James  Clark  was  admittit  and  appoynted  to  be  placed  in 
the  sd  hospitall  and  ordainit  to  be  interteined  yintill  according  as  the  rest  of 
the  poor  men  he  being  subject  to  the  injunctiounes  pscr>^ved  to  the  rest. 

Decimo  Octohris  1666. 
The  qlk  day  Johne  Miller  lait  bailUe  and  last  deacon  conveiner  on  lyfe 
with  the  deacones  of  craftes  and  bretherine  of  thair  counsell  being  conveined 
within  thair  hospital!  for  electing  thrie  persones  of  thair  number  to  be  pntit 
this  day  to  the  provest  bailhes  and  counsell  of  this  burghe  to  the  effect  that 
they  mak  choyse  of  ane  of  them  to  beir  office  as  deacon  conveiner  within  the 
samjTie  for  the  zeir  enshewing  be  plurahtie  of  voates  thes  persones  following 
to  witt    Johne  Miller   lait    bailhe  Thomas  Campbell  maltman  and    Robert 


i666]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


413 


Carutheres  tailzeo''  wer  made  choyse  of  to  the  effect  forsd  and  ordaines  this 
lyt  to  be  pntit  be  (  ).     Therefter  the  sd  Johne  Miller  was  made 

choyse  of  to  beir  office  as  deacon  conveiner  for  the  zeir  enshewing. 


Thir  persones  ar  choysen  to  be  on  the  deacon  conveiners  counsell  for  the 

Deacones 


zeir  enshewing 


Jo"  Leiper 
Androw  Scot 
Johne  Wood 
Johne  Scot 
Walter  Stewart 
Robert  Boyd  yo^ 


John  MiUer  visitour 
Thomas  Miller 
Archibald  Bogle 
Johne  Cauldwall 
Cuthbert  Greg 
Michael  Gilmour 
Johne  Walker 


William  Boyd  baillie 
Maltmen 


Hammermen  Alex''  Jamfray 

David  Robesoune 
Androw  Purdoune 
Harie  Watt 
Patrick  M^Ilvicker 

Tailzeo""s         Johne  Ker 

Robert  Carutheres 
James  Davidsone 
James  Blair 
Johne  Thomesone 

Cordouneres    James  Mitchell 
Johne  Listoune 
James  Thomesone 
Gabriell  Clark 
Johne  Pinkertoune 

Weaveres        Johne  Falcouner 
Patrick  Bryce 
Johne  Clark 

Baxteres  Daniell  Purdowne 

William  Glen  elder 

Measones         Johne  Clark 

Thomas  Cauldwell  elder 


Thomas  Campbell 
Androw  Mudie 
Patrick  Bryce 
Johne  Watsoune 
James  Campbell 


Chyrurgianes    Johne  Hall 
Wrightes 


Skinners 


Couperes 


Fleshors 


James  Colquhoune 
Alex''  Eghngtoune 

Manasses  Lyll 
Androw  Love 

Robert  Findlay 
Thomas  Smythe 

Alex''  Holmes 
James  Gilmour 


Bonnetmakers  Niniane  Spens 


414 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW 


[1666 


Four  men  to 
sitt  on  the 
dean  of  gilds 
counsel!. 


Cowperes. 


Cordouneres 


Viidecimo  Ociobris  1666. 

The  qlk  day  Johne  Miller  newlie  choysen  deacon  conveiner  w'  the  deacones 
of  craftes  and  persones  above  named  being  conveined  in  thair  hospitall  and 
all  for  the  most  p'  being  pnt  thes  four  persones  following  viz  Johne  Hall  James 
Colquhoune  Thomas  Campbell  and  Johne  Ker  wer  be  plurahtie  of  voats  choysen 
to  sitt  for  the  craftes  rank  on  the  dean  of  gilds  counsell  for  ane  zeir  to  com. 

Sexto  Novembris  1666. 

Conveined  the  deacone  conveiner  and  w'  him  Wilham  Boyd 
baillie  as  also  the  deacones  of  cordouners  tailzeo^'s  weaveres 
maissounes  baxteres  chyrurgianes  vvrightes  skinneres  bonnetmakeres 
the  visitour  of  maltmen  and  divers  wther  persones  of  the  deacone 
conveiner  his  counsell. 

The  same  day  in  ansere  to  the  biO  of  complent  given  in  be  Cuthbert  Greg 
deacon  of  couperes  aganest  divers  of  his  maisteres  of  calling  for  hindering  him 
to  book  Ro'  Gibsone  as  juma^-man  w'  Johne  Nisbit  he  haveing  maid  his  say 
and  fund  sufficient  the  sd  deacone  conveiner  and  vtheres  forsd  conveined 
with  him  after  considera'une  had  thairanent  ordaines  the  sd  Robert  Gibsone 
to  be  booked  and  the  money  he  is  to  pay  thairfor  to  be  given  to  the  collectour 
of  the  calling  and  that  y''  book  beir  the  same  that  he  may  be  chargit  thairwith 
at  the  making  of  his  compt  and  ordaines  Johne  Pollok  Thomas  Smyth  James 
Ingraham  elder  Johne  Gemmill  and  Charles  Pollok  to  be  w  arded  in  the  tolbuith 
for  disobeying  thair  deacon  and  that  dureing  the  deacon  conveiner  and  Bailhe 
Boyds  will  and  the  sdes  Johne  Pollock  and  James  Ingraham  to  be  warded  in 
clos  ward  and  ilk  ane  of  the  fyve  is  fyned  in  ane  new  vpsett. 

The  same  day  anent  ane  bill  of  complent  given  in  and  sub'  be  James 
^^'addrope  Gabriel  Corbett  James  Thomsoune  for  themselfes  and  in  name 
and  behalf  of  the  haill  bretherine  of  the  trade  of  cordouneres  and  tanneres 
who  will  adhere  to  them  bearing  that  q"'  they  and  thair  predicesso''s  hes  beine 
verie  active  and  real!  in  goeing  about  by  all  lawU  meanes  for  collecting  in  of 
moneyes  for  suppbe  of  the  poor  decaj^ed  bretherine  of  the  calling  soe  long 
as  they  had  charge  of  the  calling  and  befor  Michaelmes  last  the  above  named 
persones  and  vtheres  who  had  then  power  of  the  calling  did  pas  thair  wordes 
to  the  Laird  of  Kinkaid  to  collect  and  ingather  eight  hunderethe  markes  to 
the  twa  hunderethe  marks  he  hes  to  mak  vpe  ane  thowsand  markes  wpon 
sufficient  band  and  cautioune  and  now  Johne  Wood  pnt  deacone  of  the  calling 
and  hes  maisteres  ar  lyke  to  prove  instrumentall  to  mak  the  compleineres 
brek  thair  promeis  to  the  gentleman  to  whom  the\'  wer  ingadged  for  thes 
monej'es  and  is  of  intentioune  to  tak  the  same  moneyes  and  to  lend  them  out 
to  Thomas  Dobbie  brother  in  law  to  the  sd  Johne  Wood  wpon  ane  wadsett 
of  some  old  howsses  he  hes  at  the  wynd  head  qlk  we  concea\e  will  not  prove 


i666]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  415 

soe  good  for  the  weill  of  the  poor  for  give  thes  moneyes  be  lent  out  wpon  band 
and  ca'une  they  may  be  sought  in  againe  everie  half  zeir  give  soe  necessitie 
sould  requyre  bot  if  they  be  lent  out  wpon  wadsets  of  old  howsses  it  will  not 
prove  to  be  so  reddie  albeit  necessitie  requyre  and  for  this  end  the  sd  Johne 
Wood  pnt  deacone  hes  taine  fra  James  Mitchell  last  deacone  his  kie  he-  had 
of  the  box  the  lyke  practise  q''of  hes  not  bein  seine  among  the  deacones  of 
this  burghe  thes  fourtie  zeires  bygaine  cravand  thairfor  the  sd  deacone  con- 
veiner  and  wthers  conveined  with  him  to  tak  the  sd  complent  to  thair  wyse 
considera'une  and  to  desyd  thairin  as  they  think  convenient  qlk  being  called 
_the  sd  Johne  Wood  being  pnt  and  all  being  interest  and  pnt  being  hard  to 
speik  for  themselfes  the  said  deacone  conveiner  and  wthers  forsd  conveined 
with  him  efter  mature  advyce  and  delibera~une  had  thairanent  they  ordaine 
the  sdes  moneyes  to  be  lent  to  the  Laird  of  Kinkaid  vpon  sufficient  securitie 
according  to  the  first  promeis  made  to  him  y'anent  and  becaws  it  was  grantit 
be  the  sd  Jo"  Wood  that  lie  had  taken  the  kie  fra  the  sd  Jo"  Mitchell  lait  deacone 
bot  that  he  had  offered  the  samyne  againe  qlk  he  refuissed  to  accept  w'out  ane 
ordoure  therfor  all  pnt  ordaines  the  sd  James  Mitchell  to  accept  bak  againe 
his  sd  kie  of  the  box. 

Quarto  Decembris  1666. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacon  conveiner  w*  the  deacones  of  craftes  being  conveined 
and  thair  bretherine  of  counsell  who  for  the  most  pairt  wer  pnt  Patrick  Brj'ce 
maltman  late  collecto""  maid  his  compt  of  his  intromissioune  belonging  to  the 
hospitall  fra  Michaelmes  or  the  tyme  of  his  electioune  to  this  day  qrof  charge 
and  discharge  is  as  followes  and  first  the 

Charg. 

In  the  first  he  charges  himselfe  w'  y'  qlk  was  restand  in  his  hand 

at  the  making  of  his  last  compt  extending  to  .  .     211  16     8 

Item  w'  that  qlk  he  receavit  that  same  day  of  burgess  money 

extending    to  .  .  .  .  .  .       54  14     o 

Item  receavit  be  him  for  the  hospitall  pairt  of  ane  French  shipe 

of  wyne  was  brought  in  and  sold  heir  twentie  rex  dollop's  .  58  o  o 
Item  receavit  fra  W™  and  Jo"  Sheilles  in  Gorballes  for  the  arent 

of  350  merks  fra  Martimes  1664  to  Martimes  1665     .  .       14     o     o 

Item  receavit  fra  Alex^  Govean  for  the  arent  of  100  markes  for 

the  sd  zeir  .  .  .  .  .  .400 

Item  receavit  fra  David  Miller  mer^  for  the  arent  of  500  marks 

for  the  sd  zeir  .  .  .  .  .  .       20     o     0 

Item  receavit  fra  Jo"  Miller  deacone  cyveiner  for  the  arent  of 

400  marks  viz  fra  Martimes  1662  to  Martimes  1664  .  .       32     o     o 

Item  fra  Androw  King  at  PoUokshaw  mylne  for  the  arent  of  1000 

marks  fra  Witsonday  1665  to  Witsonday  1666       ,  ,       40     o     0 


4i6  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1666 

Item  receavit  fra  W™  Andersoune  provest  for  the  arent  of  500 

markes  fra  Witsonday  1665  to  Witsonday  1666       .  .       20     o     o 

Item  receavit  fra  Ro*  Adame  in  p*  payet  of  the  few  dewiies  .  32  o  0 
Item  fra  James  Bowie  for  the  meall  of  ane  laighe  hows  of  James 

Duncans  lands  fra  Witsonday  1665  to  Witsonday  1666  .  20  o  o 
Item  fra  Jo"  Clark  for  ane  zeires  meall  of  ane  heighe  hows  of  the 

sds  lands  fra  Witsonday  1663  to  Witsonday  1664     .  .       30     o     o 

Item  fra  W'"  Leckie  for  the  meall  of  that  same  heigh  hows  fra 

Witsonday  1665  to  Witsonday  1666  .  .  .       30     o     o 

Item  receavit  fra  the  haill  deacones  of  qrter  compts  that  sam 

zeir  .......() 

Item  receavit  for  the  hospitalls  pairt  for  the  arent  of  8000  marks 

out  of  the  land  of   Gorballs   conforme    to    28-3-2    per  1000 

for  the  crope  1665  .....     225     5     4 

Item  receavit  fra  James  Gilmour  late  deacone  of  the  fleshoures 

and  W™  Clydsdaill  late  deacon  of  the  chyrurgianes  for  thair 

swordes  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       16    o    o 

Item  receavit  be  the  compter  for  ane  peace  of  iron  he  sold  y'  was 

taken  out  of  the  steiple       .  .  .  .  .         i  16     o 

Suiha  of  the  haill  charg  is 

ane    thowsand    seavintine    pundes    eightine    shilhng    eight 
pennies. 

Discharge. 
In  the  first  deburst  to  the  sex  men  in  the  hows  at  12  li  each  ane 

of  them  per  quarter    inde  ....     288     o     o 

Item  for  coalles  and  peits  to  them  the  haill  zeir    .  .  .       18     o     o 

Item  for  sarkes  to  them  the  peace  at  8s.  the  ell     .  .  .       16  16     o 

Item  for  ane  pair  of  shoes  to  ilk  ane  of  them  at  36s.  the  pair  16  o  o 
Item  deburst  to  severall  poor  people  at  Hallow  court  conforme 

to   the   warrand         .  .  .  .  .  14  18     o 

Item  to  Ro"'  AUane  for  extracting  the  decreit  of  the  few  duties  on 

parchment  belonging  to  the  hows     .  .  .  .         i  10     0 

Item  to  Baillie  Boyd  and  to  warkmen  for  the  bracestone  and 

harthstone  ..... 

Item  to  the  dark  ...... 

Item   to   W™   Bradie        ...... 

Item  to  Ro'  Adame  off''  ..... 

Item  deburst  be  the  compter  himselfe  for  ane  hors  twyce  west  to 

Faill  and  Aire  and  his  expenss  for  the  hors  and  himself  anent 

Hunterstounes  bussines  .  .  .  .  .       13     o     o 

Item  for  the  hows  pairt  of  the  few  dewtie  of  the  Gorballes  to  the 

bischopes  chamberland  for  the  crope  1664  and  1665  .  .       23  13     4 


12 

14 

0 

20 

0 

0 

20 

0 

0 

20 

0 

0 

i666]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  417 

Item  to  the  coUedg  factour  for  Houisounes  bursour  as  his  dis- 
charge beires  for  anno  1665  .  .  .  .       66  13    4 

Item  to  severall  poor  persones  at  Lambmes  court  as  y""  warrand  beires      20     o     o 

Item  for  ane  bed  door  2  bandes  ane  heigh  shelf  and  twa  lokes  to 

James  Duncanes  heigh  hows  .  .  .  .280 

Item  for  mending  the  glas  windows  of  v/  James  Duncanes  hows 

heigh  and  laigh        .  .  .  .  .  .         i  16    o 

Item  to  Baillie  Boyd  and  to  wrightes  for  nailes  as  the  compt  beires 

anent  the  repairing  of  the  stiple       .  .  .  .       ig     6     o 

Item  lent  to  James  Hammiltoune  brother  jermane  to  the  Laird 
of  Hayes  as  prifill  and  M''  Johne  Cniikes  as  cauner  at  Mar- 
times    1665  ......     166  13     4 

Item  deburst  to  vmqll  Gabriel  Con3mghames  wyfe  conforme  to 

her    discharge  .  .  .  .  .  .         8  10    o 

Summa  of   the   discharge   extendes   to        .  .     744     4     4 

Sua  charge  and  discharge  being  compeared  thair  restes  in  the 
compters  hand  twa  hunderethe  thrie  scoir  threttine  pundes  fourtine 
shilling  four  pennies  qlk  sowme  the  compter  hes  instantlie  delyvered 
to  James  Blair  now  elected  collecto''  and  thairfor  the  compter  is 
heirby  dischargit  accordinglie. 

The  same  day  be  pluralitie  of  voates  James  Blair  tailzeour  is  choysen  Blair 
collecto''  to  the  hows  for  ane  zeir  to  com  quho  being  pnt  did  accept  and  gave  '^°  '^"""''' 
his  oath  as  vse  is. 

Thair  is  zit  in  the  handes  of  Patrick  Bryce  late  collectour  the  haill  wrytes  Memorandum 
releating  Hunter  of  Whytsyd. 

The  qlk  day  ordaines  Thomas  Campbell  Jo"  Leiper  Androw  Scot  and  To  compt  with 
Johne  Wood  to  clois  comptes  w'  Ro*  Adame  off  anent  his  ingathering  of  the  ^°'  ^'*^"'^* 
few  dewties  belonging    to  the  hospitall    for  tymes  bygaine  conform  to  the 
decreites  obtained  yi'wpon. 

Item  the  aforsd  Patrick  Bryce  delyverit  this  day  to  the  collectour  the  To  charge  the 
last  zeires  burges  silver  extending  to  twentie  ane  pundes  and  ordaines  him  ''"  ^"^  °' 
to  be  chargit  thairwith  and  w'  the  forsd  sowme  receavit  be  him  pntlie  fra  the 
sd  Patrick  yt  was  restand  be  him  at  the  closing  of  his  compt. 

The  same  day  it  is  ordanit  that  the  coUecto''  put  James  Hammiltounes  Hammiltounes 
band  to  executioune  in  the  qlk  M""  Jo"  Cruikes  is  cauner.  pu't'to'"  ^^ 

executioune. 

The  same  day  it  is  concludit  be  all  present  that  that  twentie  pund  qlk  W°  Bradies 
hes  bein  formerlie  payit  zeirlie  thir  few  zeires  bygaine  to  W™  Bradie  be  not  dkch'argit- 
farder  payit  to  him. 

2C 


4i8  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1666 

Schemes  band  xhe  band  of  (  )   Scheilles  in  Gorballes  in  the  qlk  Patrick 

to  be  put  to  ^  '  ^ 

executiouneor  Brj'ce  malt  is  cauner  is  given  to  the  collect o''  to  be  put  to  executioune  or  els 

els  reneued.  , 

renewed. 

Follows  the  cattolog  of  the  handcs  belonging  to  the  hospitall. 

Item   thair  is   awand   be   Androw  King   in   Pollokshaw   mylne    1000   marks 

conforme  to  his  band  for  the  qlk  they  stand  infeft  in  his  lands  in  Trongait 

and  the  arent  thairof  is  awand  fra  Witsonda\'  1666. 
Item  thair  was  awand  be  vmqell  James  Duncane  brassmyth  1000  markes  for 

the  qlk  thej'  stand  infeft  in  his  lands  in  Saltmarcat  and  the  arent  yrof  is 

payit  be  the  mealls  of  the  howss. 
Item  thair  is  awand  be  Alex''  Govean  100  markes  conform  to  his  band  qrof 

thair  will  be  a  zeirs  arent  awand  at  Martimes  1666. 
Item  thair  is  awand  be  David  Miller  merchand  500  marks  conforme  to  his  band 

qrof  ther  is  a  zeirs  arent  awand  at  Mertimes  1666. 
Item  thair  is  awand  be  Wilham  .\ndersoune  provest  500  markes  conforme 

to  his  band  qrof  y''  will  be  a  zeirs  arent  awand  at  \A'itsonday  1667. 
Item  thair  is  awand  be  Robert  Caruthers  tailzeour  400  markes  conforme  to 

his  band  qrof  the  arent  is  awand  sen  Martimes  1664. 
Item  thair  is  awand  be  Johne  Miller  deacone  cyveiner  400  markes  conforme 

to  his  band  qrof  the  arent  is  awand  sen  Martimes  1664. 
Item  thair  is  awand  be  Robert  Hunter  of  Whytsyd  and  his  cauneres  seavintie 

ane  pundes  ten  shilling  as  being  the  equall  half  of  the  priiill  sowme  con- 

teinit  in  his  band  and  is  to  pay  arente  for  b3Times  conforme  as  he  and 

Patrick  Bryce  late  collector  his  agriet. 
Item  thair  is  awand  be  vmqell  Edward  Hammiltoune  of  Silvertounehill  40  li 

w'  the  bygane  arentes. 
Item  thair  is  awand  be  David  Robesoune  beltmaker  as  that  qlk  was  restand 

in  his  hand  at  the  making  of  his  compt  threttie  punds  vij  s.  viij  d. 
Item  awand  be  \V™  and  Johne  Sheilles  in  Gorballes  550  markes  conforme  to 

y''  band  qrof  y'^  will  be  ane  zeirs  arent  awand  at  Martimes  1666. 
Item  thair  is  awand  be  the  Laird  of  Hardgray  300  markes  conforme  to  his 

band  qrof  the  arent  is  awand  sen  Martimes  1664. 
Item  y""  is  awand  be  James  Hammiltoune  broy''  to  the  good  man  of  Hayes 

166-13-4  for  the  qlk  M^  Jo"  Craiks  is  cauner  and  y""  will  be  a  zeirs  arent 

awand  at  Martimes  1666. 

Decimo  nono  Jdrij  1667. 

Compt  made  The  sd  da}'  Thomas  Campbell  and  vtheres  who  wer  appoynted  to  clos 

be  Robert        compts  w'  Ro'  Adame  y""  off''  anent  his  intromissioune  w*  the  small  dewties 

conteined  in  the  rentall  qrin  the  sd  Ro*  gave  vp  of  non  payments  zeirlie  four 

pund  -xiij  s.  iiij  d.  and  of  this  y''  is  awing  out  of  Walter  Millers  land  in  Salt- 


1667]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TR.\DES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  419 

marcat  zeirlie  fyftie  seavine  shillings  qlk  is  awand  zeirlie  sine  the  zeir  1652 
and  out  of  James  Duncans  land  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  zeirly  and  becaus  y'  collecto''s 
gets  intromissioune  \v'  the  mealls  of  the  sds  lands  ordaines  y"'  collecto''s  to  pay 
the  said  zeirlie  and  to  give  it  vp  in  his  compt  to  the  effect  it  may  be  keeped 
in  retenlis  in  the  rentall  and  y'  is  awand  zeirlie  be  W"  Conyngham  for  his  land 
in  Briggait  fyftine  shilling  and  they  find  the  sd  Ro'  to  be  awand  conforme  to 
his  intromissioune  twentie  ane  pund  iij  s.  iiij  d.  qlk  he  is  ordainit  to  pay  to  the 
collecto'". 

The  same  [day]  Robert  Adame  off''  is  continued  collecto''  of    the    few  Adame 
dewties  conteined  in  the  rentall  he  finding  sufficient  catioune  to  pay  the  said  *^°  ^'^'°'' 
yeirlie. 

The  same  day  it  is  recommended  to  the  deacones  to  be  thinking  and  Considering 

VG  WGQk  StQtC 

considdering  wpon  the  weak  estat  of  the  hows  haveing  nothing  to  menteine  of  the  house. 
all  the  burdines  incumbent  thairto  bot  the  rent  of  four  or  fyve  thowsand 
markes  and  that  qlk  is  gottin  out  of  the  Gorballs  zeirhe  qrby  the  hows  is  lyk 
to  com  to  vtter  ruing  and  that  mainlie  be  taking  away  thairfra  the  benefeit 
of  the  mortcloathes  qlk  it  formerlie  had  and  be  casting  one  the  hows  ane 
insupportable  burding  of  the  poor  of  the  haill  calUng  of  the  towne  and  appoynts 
the  deacons  to  communicat  the  same  to  y''  severall  trades  and  to  advyse  w^ 
them  how  the  hows  sail  be  made  vp  againe  and  to  report. 

Vigesimo  noiio  Jarij  1667. 

Coveined  Jo"  Miller  deacon  cyveiner  and  w*  him  William  Boyd, 
baillie,  Manasses  Lyll  Jo"  Hall  James  Colhoune  Jo"  Ker  w*  the 
deacones  of  hamermen  tailzeo''s  visitour  of  maltmen  deacones  of 
coupers  chirurgians  cordouners  baxters  wrightes  meassones  vivers 
skinners  as  also  Alex""  Jamfray  Robert  Caruthers  Patrick  Bryce 
weiver  James  Davidsone  who  are  ane  p'  of  the  sd  deacon  cyveiners 
counsell. 

The  same  day  it  is  concluded  vnanimouslie  be  the  haill  psones  abovewfen  Excise  of  malt 
that  befoir  the  towne  be  stented  be  way  of  poll  money  or  vtherwayes  that  the  Augmented. 
echys  be  augmented  be  leying  one  fyftine  shilling  on  the  mask  mair  nor  it 
payes  now. 

Decimo  tertio  Maij  1667. 

Conveined  Jo"  Miller  deacon  cyveiner  and  w'  him  WilUam 
Boyd,  bailhe,  Thomas  Campbell  Jo"  Ker  Jo"  Hall  w'  the  deacones 
of  hammermen  tailzeo''s  visitour  of  maltmen  the  deacons  of  weivers 
coupers  skinners  baxters  chirurgians  James  Mitchell  for  the  deacon 
of  coupers  w'  Ro'  Caruthers  and  Jo"  Watsoune  two  of  the  deacon 
cyveiners  counsell. 


420  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1667 


Complaint 
And' 

Watsoune 
flesher  ag'  the 
deac°  of  y* 
fleshers. 


Decreit  ag' 

Geminill 

annullit. 


Memorandum. 


The  same  day  in  ansere  to  the  complent  given  in  be  Androw  Watsoune 
fleshour  ag*  the  deacon  of  the  fleshours  for  refuising  to  admitt  him  frieman 
w*  the  calling  he  being  burges  and  gildbrother  o£  this  burgh  and  ane  friemans 
sone  of  the  calling  it  was  ordained  that  the  deacon  \v'  Georg  Broom  Alex"" 
Holmes  and  W™  Gilmour  who  wer  put  w'  him  should  produce  thair  Ire  of 
deaconhead  and  y""  book  becaws  it  was  decleared  be  the  deacon  cy\-einer  that 
thes  thrie  zeirs  bygaine  they  wold  never  mak  ane  compt  and  in  respect  y* 
some  of  them  flathe  denyed  to  doe  the  sam  in  judgement  and  y''for  they  wer 
all  charged  to  remaine  in  ward  q"  they  gave  obedience  thairto  qrwpon  yrefter 
they  produced  y""  sd  Ire  of  deaconhead  qrin  it  was  fund  3'  the  most  they  could 
exact  of  any  man  entering  frieman  w'  them  in  y'  calling  was  fyve  pund  scots 
of  \T)sett  and  fyftie  shilhng  fra  ane  friemans  sone  and  they  having  produced 
thair  book  it  was  fund  yrin  that  the}'  had  never  booked  ane  formall  compt 
be  charge  and  discharge  and  in  se\-erall  places  had  omitted  q*  they  had  receaved 
fra  friemen  at  y'"  entries  qlk  was  fund  ane  g*  fault  and  neglect  and  becaus 
the}"  produced  ane  compt  \-nbooked  qlk  they  say  was  for  the  last  thrie  zeires 
they  wer  ordained  y^ior  to  set  downe  y'  compt  in  forme  and  to  book  it  accord- 
inglie  and  yrefter  to  show  the  said  to  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones  and 
soe  to  book  all  ther  compts  heirefter. 

Vigesimo  quarto  Jitnij  1667. 
Convined  the  decon  cyviner  and  w*  him  the  deacones  of  hamer- 
men  tailzo's  visito"'  decones  of  baxters  veavers  skinners  measounes 
Wrights  flesho^'s  and  bonnetmakers. 

This  day  ther  being  producit  ane  decreit  be  Cuthbert  Grege  decone  of 
coupers  as  gi%'ine  out  and  pronuncit  be  John  Robisoune  lait  decone  of  coupers 
ag'  John  Gemmill  couper  daitit  the  tenth  of  this  instant  qlk  decreit  was 
disclamed  and  denayed  be  the  sd  Jo"  Robisoune  and  that  it  was  declared  in 
judgment  wpon  oath  be  George  Pollok  off^  of  the  calling  that  he  never  warned 
the  sd  Jo"  Gemmill  to  come  to  the  court  to  anser  to  the  complent  qrvpon 
the  sd  complent  is  pronuncit  and  the  sd  decon  cv'viner  and  decones  of  crafts 
perceaving  yrby  that  all  y'  had  beine  done  yranent  was  done  be  the  sd  Cuthbert 
was  done  ag*  the  sd  Jo"  Geriiill  out  of  splanie  and  invay  and  they  f}'nding  all 
was  done  for  scolding  and  flyting  and  so  pertined  to  ane  other  judicatorie 
Iherfor  it  is  fund  be  the  forsd  decon  cyviner  and  others  that  the  samyne  decreit 
is  altogither  illegalhe  proceidit  wpon  and  declared  and  decemes  the  sd  John 
Gemmill  to  be  altogither  frie  of  the  saxtine  pund  he  is  decerned  in  yrby  as  a 
new  vpset. 

To  charge  the  collector  at  the  making  of  his  compt  of  ane  hundreth  and 
twentie  pund  he  receavit  fra  Simon  Tennent  tailzo''  for  his  gildrie  f}'ne  and  w' 
ane  other  hundreth  and  t«entie  pimd  he  receavit  fra  John  Park  tailyo'  for 
the  lyke. 


166;]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  421 

Vigesimo  lerlio  Augiislj  ibbj. 
This  day  the  compt  of  the  rent  of  Gorbells  being  cast  and  comptit  for  the  Gorbai!  rent 
cropt  1666  with  the  crafts  hospitall  pairt  of  the  teynds  of  the  sds  lands  the    '^^^ 
collectors  fie  being  rebaitit  with  four  pund  sex  shilling  viij  d.  was  deburst 
for  metting  of  W"'  Corbets  land  the  haill  frie  rent  and  teynds  forsd  war  fund 
to  extend  to  aught  hundreth  thrie  scoir  twa  punds  x  s.  lod.  qlk  being  devydit 
in  31  pairts  ther  falls  to  pay  for  everie  thousand  merks  the  crafts  hes  lying 
on  the  sds  lands  twentie  seavine  punds  sextine  shilling  fyve  pennies. 

Nono  Octobris  1667. 
The  qlk  day  Johne  Miller  deacon  cyveiner  w'  the  deacones  of  craftes  and 
thair  counsell  who  for  the  most  p'  wer  pnt  being  cyveined  for  electing  two 
persones  of  thair  number  to  be  pntit  \\'  the  sd  old  deacon  cyveiner  to  the 
magrates  and  counsell  of  this  burghe  this  day  to  the  effect  that  ane  of  them 
may  be  choysen  deacon  cyveiner  for  a  zeir  to  com  be  pluralitie  of  voats  Jo" 
Hall  chirurgiane  and  Patrick  Bryce  maltman  wer  choysen  and  electit  to  the 
effect  forsd  and  ordaines  the  sd  lytes  to  be  pntit  w'  the  deacons  of  harhermen 
and  cordouners. 

After  this  the  sd  Johne  Miller  is  continued  deacon  conveiner  for  ane  zeir 
to  com. 

Follows  the  names  of  ikes  choysen  be  (he  deacon  cyveiner  to  be  one  his  counsell 
for  the  zeir  following  and  first  the  deacones. 
Alexf  Govean  Jo"  Wallace  visitour 

James  Davidsoune  Jo"  Otterburne 

James  Mitchell  Ar^  Bogle 

Daniell  Purdowne  Andrew   Love 

Jo"  Clark  weaver  Ro'  Findlay 

Jo"  Clark  measoune  W">  Gilmour 

Niniane  Spen> 
Jo"  Ker  baillie 

Hammermen  Johne  Leiper  Malt.  Johne  Miller 

Alex'  Jamfraj-  Patrick  Bryce 

W™  Philpe  Walter  Bryce 

Harie  Watt  Jo"  Watsoune 

Jo"  Johnstoune  peuderer  Wilham  Wallace 

Tailzeoi's         Andrew  Scot  Chirurgianes     Johne  Hall 

Rot  Carutheres  James  Thomsowne 

Adam  Woodrow 

James  Blair  Wrightes  Thomas  Miller 

W'm  Watsowne  James  Colquhoune 


422  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 

Skinners 


[1667 


Four  men 
to  be  one  the 
dean  of  gild 
his  counsel). 


Cordouneres   Johne  Wood 

Gabriell  Corbett 
Johne  Listoune 
James  Thomsowne 
James  Waddrope 


Baxteres 


Weiveres 


Johne  Scot 
WilUam  Glen  elder 

Walter  Stewart 
Patrick  Bryce 
Johne  Falcouner 


Cowperes 


Fleshours 


Manasses  Lyll 
Johne  Cauldwell 


Cuthbert  Greg 
Johne  Young 

James  Gilmour 
Alex""  Holmes 


Bonnetmakers  Johne  Walker 


Measounes      Robert  Boyd  younger 


Decimo  Octobris  1667. 

The  sd  day  Johne  Miller  newlie  continued  deacon  cjn^einer  \v'  the  deacones 
of  craftes  w'  the  persones  befoir  named  choysen  to  be  one  his  counsell  for  ane 
zeir  to  com  being  conveined  who  for  the  most  p'  wer  pnt  for  making  choys 
of  four  of  thair  number  to  sitt  w'  the  dean  of  gild  his  counsell  the  zeir  enshewing 
be  pluraUtie  of  voates  thes  persones  following  wer  electit  to  the  effect  forsd 
viz  Jo"  Hall  chirargiane  James  Colquhoune  wright  Patrick  Bryce  and  W™ 
Wallace  maltmen  wer  elected. 


Compt 

Blair. 


Vigesimo  primo  Octobris  1667. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacon  conveiner  deacones  of  craftes  and  y''  bretherine 
of  counsell  being  conveined  who  for  the  most  p'  wer  pnt  for  the  heiring  of  James 
Blair  y''  late  collecto''  his  compt  of  his  intromissione  and  distributione  of  the 
rentes  belonging  to  the  craftes  hospitall  w^in  this  burgh  sen  his  entrie  to  the 
sd  charge  qrof  charge  and  discharge  is  as  followes  and  first  the 

Charge. 

In  the  first  the  compter  charges  himself  w'  q'  he  rece'  fra  Pat  Bryce 
the  last  collecto""  q'  was  restand  in  his  handes  at  the  makeing 
of  his  compt  extending  to     .  .  .  .  .     273  14     4 

Item  rece'  be  him  of  burgess  silver  at  his  first  entrie       .  .       21     o    o 

Item  rece*  be  him  fra  Jo"  Sheilles  in  Gorballs  for  the  arent  of  350 

marks  fra  Martimes  1665  to  Witsonday  1667  .  .       21     0     o 

Item  rece'  fra  David  Miller  for  the  arent  of  500  marks  fra  Mar- 
times  1665  to  Martimes  1666  .  .  .  .       20     0     o 
Item  rece'  fra  Alex''  Govean  for  the  arent  of  100  marks    .  .         400 
Item  rece'  fra  Ro'  Adame  to  ane  accompt  of  the  sdes  ground 

awelles  .  .  .  ,  .  .  .       40    3    4 


20 

0 

0 

20 

0 

0 

120 

0 

0 

166;]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  423 

Item  rece'  fra  the  Laird  of  Halgray  for  the  aient  of  300  marks 

fra  Martimes  1664  to  Martimes  1666  .  .  .       24     o     o 

Item  rece'  fra  James  Hamiltone  vncle  to  the  good  man  of  Hayes 
for  the  arent  of  250  marks  fra  Martimes  1665  to  Witsonday 
1667  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       15    o    o 

Item  rece'  fra  W'"  Leckie  and  James  Bowie  mefds  as  ane  p'  of  the 
mailles  of  the  lands  qlk  pteined  to  v/  James  Duncan  fra 
Witsonday  1667  [?  1666]  to  Witsonday  1667  .  .       52    o    o 

Item  rece'  fra  Andrew  King  for  the  arent  of  1000  marks  fra  Wit- 
sonday 1666  to  Witsonday  1667       .  .  .  .       40     o     o 

Item  rece'  fra  W™  Andersone  late  provest  for  the  arent  of  500 
markes  fra  Witsonday  1666  to  ^^'itsonday  1667 

Item  rece'  fra  Simone  Tenent  for  his  gilderie  fyne 

Item  rece'  fra  Jo°  Park  tailzeo''  for  his  gilderie  fyne 

Item  rece'  fra  Andrew  Scot  tailzeo""  Jo"  Wood  cordouner  Walter 
Stewart  weiver  Ai"^  Bogle  chirurgian  when  they  wer  elected 
new  deacones  in  name  of  y^  sword  money  for  ilk  ane  of 
them  8  ll    inde         .  .  .  .  .  .       32    o    o 

Item  rece'  for  qrter  comptes  fra  the  deacones      .  .  .     206    6    8 

Item  rece'  for  the  arent  of  8000  markes  qlk  the  hows  hes  lying 
one  the  Gorballes  for  the  crope  1666  at  27  I1  i6s.  5d.  for  ilk 
thowsand  ......     222  10     4 

Item  rece'  for  som  od  cleiks  was  fund  in  the  hospitall      .  .568 

Item  rece'  fra  Ro'  Adame  as  ane  p'  of  the  small  arentes  conteined 

in  the  rentall  .  .  .  .  .  .       24  i5    o 

Summa        ......    1261  17     4 

Followcs  the  compters  Discharge. 

In  the  first  the  compter  discharges  himself  w'  the  sowme  following 

deburst  be  him  for  mentinance  of  the  sex  poor  men  in  the 

hows  at  48  pund  per  peice  the  haill  yeir 
Item  deburst  for  coalls  and  peites  to  the  hows 
Item  deburst  to  severall  poor  persones  be  warrand 
Item  deburst  for  shoon  being  sex  pair  to  the  poor  men  at  36s.  per 

pair  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       10  16     o 

Item  deburst  for  42  ells  of  sarking  cloath  to  be  y''  sarkes  at  8s. 

per  ell  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       16  16    o 

Item  deburst  for  fyve  ells  of  cloath  to  be  ane  cleuk  to  Jo"  Andersone 

ane  of  the  poor  men  in  the  hows  and  for  making  ane  coat  out  of 

his  old  cleuk  and  for  furnishing  yrto  .  .  .  .700 

Item  given  at  the  comand  of  the  deacon  cyveiner  to  v/  W™ 

Andersones  relict       .  .  .  .  .  .         i  10     o 

Item  deburst  to  W™  Boyd  skinner  for  his  supphe  .  .         i  10    o 


;8S 

0 

0 

16 

0 

0 

18 

16 

0 

424 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGO\\'. 


[1667 


Item  giv'Cn  be  ordo""  to  Ro'  Adame  off''    .... 
Item  deburst  to  the  dean  of  gilds  off''  for  charging  Simon  Tennent 

and  Jo°  Park  tailzeo''  to  be  gildbrother 
Item  deburst  for  ane  new  kie  to  the  bell  hows  door 
Item  deburst  to  vmqell  Gabriell  Conynghames  relict  conforme 

to  her  discharge        ...... 

Item  deburst  to  the  colledge  collecto"'  for  v/  M''  Jo"  Howisons 

bursour  conforme  to  his  discharge  .... 
Item  deburst  to  Jo°  Currie  for  crying  out  of  the  cleiks  y'  was  sold 
Item  deburst  for  the  pair  of  bed  blanketes  to  ane  of  the  poor  men  y' 

lyes  in  the  hows       ...... 

Item  deburst  to  the  clerk  for  his  fiall        .... 

Item  deburst   to  Jo°  Cors  wright   for  som  materialls  and  work 

w  rought  be  him  in  the  hospitall  .... 
Item  deburst  to  Hendrie  Murdoch  for  dressing  of  v/  James  Duncan 

his  ho\\s  and  furnishing  som  small  pticulars  yrto 
Item   the   compter  discharges   himself   w'   the  sowme   following 

deburst  be  him  to  James  Man  wpon  his  band 
Item  be  given  in  of  Simon  Tennents  band 
Item  be  given  in  of  Jo"  Park  tailzeo''  his  band 
Item   the   compter  discharges   himself   w'   the   sowme   following 

deburst  be  him  for  4  ells  3  qters  of  gray  cloath  at  30s.  the 

ell  to  be  ane  cleuk  to  David  Gray  ane  of  the  poor  men  in 

the  hows  and  for  making  and  furnishing  yrto 

Suina  of  the  discharge         .... 


20     o     o 

060 
060 

8  10    o 

66  13    4 
060 

2  13    4 
20    o    0 

324 

180 

200    o    o 

100      0      o 
100     o     o 


7  18    6 


892 


And  swa  charge  and  discharge  being  compeired  ther  restes  in 
the  compters  hand  thrie  hunderethe  thrie  scoir  nyne  punds  fyftine 
shilling  lod. 


Blair 

cytinowed 

collecto'. 


The  same  day  be  pluraUtie  of  voates  the  sd  James  Blair  was  continowed 
collectour  for  ane  zeir  to  com  who  being  pnt  did  accept  and  gave  his  oath  as 
vse  is. 


Bands 
producit. 


The  sd  day  thair  was  producit  the  particuUar  bands  following  \-iz  James 
Mans  band  for  200  tl  Simone  Tennents  band  for  100  ll  Johne  Parks  band  for 
ane  100  li  qlkes  thrie  bands  are  to  be  added  to  the  cattologe  of  the  bands  and 
the  sd  collecto'"  producit  James  Hammiltounes  band  for  250  markes  and  Jo" 
Scheilles  band  for  350  markes  qlkes  w'  James  Mans  band  are  putt  in  the  box. 


MemorandiiHi  Item  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  since  the  deacones  wer  payit  of  ther 

hesdebmsUor  P'  °^  ^'^^  Gorball  rent  for  the  crope  1666  the  pnt  collecto''  hes  payit  out  twelfe 
the  deacones.    punds  ten  shilling  as  being  the  fort  p*  of  the  few  devvtie  of  the  Gorballs  the  sd 


i668]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  425 

crope  and  the  fourt  p'  of  seavtie  thrie  pund  6s.  8d.  for  the  craftes  p'  of  the 
taxa'une  awand  out  of  the  sds  lands  the  sd  crope  qlk  is  to  be  deteined  of  the 
repive  deacones  p's  of  the  rent  of  the  Gorballs  for  the  crope  1667  by  and  besyd 
y'  zeires  p'  of  the  cornoune  burdines  of  the  land  of  Gorballes. 

Item  the  last   yeires  burges  silver  being   37-10-4    is  appoynted    to  be  The  last  yeirs 
given  to  severall  poor  be  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  such  as  he  sail  choys  to  be  distributt. 
with  him. 

Vigcsimo  Dccembris  1667. 

The  qlk  day  Johne  Miller  deacon  conveiner  being  cyveined  w'  the  deacones  Money  lent 
of  craftes  following  viz  of  hammermen  tailzeo''s  cordouners  weivers  skinners 
fleshoures  wrights  cowpers  ba.xters  meassounes  bonnetmakers  the  collecto' 
is  appoyntit  and  ordained  to  lend  Thomas  Scheirer  weivar  as  priiill  Simone 
Pittersgaill  and  James  Rowand  his  cauners  two  hunderethe  punds  \\'pon  ther 
band  payand  arent  fra  the  dait  y^of  to  Martimes  nixt. 

Qtiinto  Martij  1668. 

The  qlk  day  conveined  Jo"  Miller  deacon  conveiner  and  w*  him  the 
deacones  of  hammennen  tailzeo''s  cordouners  the  visitour  of  maltmen  the 
deacones  of  flesho''s  bonnetmakers  meassounes  baxters  wrightes  chirurgianes. 

The  same  day  it  was  vnanimouslie  condischendit  and  aggreit  wpon  that  E.\cys  of  Malt. 
the  excys  of  malt  sail  be  at  fyftie  shilling  the  mask  and  soe  to  remaine  for  the 
space  of  thrie  zeires  for  the  helping  of  the  townes  burdingis  and  after  that  to 
ceas  if  the  excys  be  lifted  of  and  if  not  to  be  rebaitit  againe  to  the  ordinarie 
pryce  appojmtit  be  the  act  of  parlia*. 

The  same  day  ordaines  ane  commissioune  to  be  given    to  Jo"   Selkrig  Selkrig 
mess'''^  for  vplifting  of  the  few  devvties  and  grownd  awells  y'  belongs  to  the  '^"  '^'^'°'' 
hows  for  the  space  of  ane  zeir  and  zeirlie  y''efter  whill  he  be  dischargit  and  to 
vse  his  best  dihgence  q'  is  restand  of  bygaine  zeires  with  power  to  him  to  give 
discharges  y^lon  and  he  is  to  have  sex  punds  of  tiall  in  the  zeir  and  q'  he  gets 
of  byrunes  he  is  to  be  considderit  y^foir. 

Vigesiniu  quinto  Augustj  ib68. 

Conveined  Johne  Miller  deacon  conveiner  the  deacones  of 
hammermen  wrightes  cordouneres  weavers  chirurgianes  covvperes 
ba.xteres  bonnetmakers. 

The  qlk  day  it  is  concludit  be  the  haill  persones  abovewrytine  that  the 
(  )   bolles  of  venter  salt  be  accepted  and  ordaines  the  deacon 

conveiners  collecto''  to  pa}'  out  thairfor  and  receave  the  samyne  and  sell  the 
same  the  best  way  he  can  for  the  weill  of  the  poor  of  thair  hows. 


426 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1668 


Lyts  deacon 
conveiner. 


Decimo  quarto  Oclo™  1668. 

The  qlk  da}'  Johne  Miller  deacon  cyveiner  vv'  ye  deacones  of  craftis  and 
their  bretherin  of  counsell  of  the  craftis  rank  being  conveined  for  electing  twa 
of  their  number  to  be  pntit  this  day  to  the  provest  baillies  and  counsell  of  this 
burgh  and  vy^s  having  intrest  with  ye  said  Johne  Miller  old  deacon  c^'veiner 
to  the  effect  ane  of  y°i  may  be  choysen  deacon  cyveiner  of  this  burgh  for  ye 
year  enshewing  be  pluralitie  of  vots  Manasses  Lyll  Jo"  Hall  wer  electit  and 
choysen  to  ye  effect  forsd  and  ordaines  the  sd  lytt  to  be  pntit  be  Jo°  Wood 
and  M''  Arfi  Grahame. 


Manasses  Lyie  Therafter  this  day  the  sd  Manasses  Lyll  was  electit  and  choysen  deacon 

conveener.        cy\'einer  of  this  burgh  for  ye  year  enshewing. 


Followes  the  names  of  ihes  persones  who  are  choysen  to  be  one  the  deacon  cyveiners 

hows  for  ane  zeir  to  com. 


James  Farie 
James  Blaire 
Jo°  Wood 
Jo"  Scot 
Walter  Stewart 
Robert  Boyd 


Wm  Wallace  visitour 
Alex''  Danizell 
W  Ard  Grahame 
W"  Goveane 
W™  Scheilles 
James  Gilmoure 
Niniane  Spens 
Ro*  Tennent 


Hammermen  Alex''  Goveane 
Alex''  Jafray 
Harie  Watt 
David  Robesoune 
Jo"  Robesoune 

Tailzeoures     Johne  Miller 

James  Davidsoune 
Andrew  Scot 
Jo"  Gilkersoune 
W™  Watsoune 

Cordowneres  James  Mitchell 
Gabriell  Park 
W™  Watsoune 
Jo"  Wilsoune 
Georg  Russell 


James  Farie  bailhe 
Maltmen 


Jo"  Miller 
Jo"  Wallace 
^^'alter  Bryce 
Patrick  Bryce 
Jo"  Watsoune 


Chirurgianes     Jo"  Hall 

Archibald  Bogle 


\\'rightes 
Skinneres 
Cowperes 


James  Colquhoune 
Jo"  Otterbume 

Andrew  Love 
Jo"  Cauldwell 

Robert  Findlay 
James  Smythe 


i668]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  427 

Baxteres         Thomas  Scot  Fleshoures  W""  Gilmour 

Daniell  Purdowne  Jo°  Berrie 

Bonnetmakeres  Johne  Walker 
W^eiveres         Johne  Clark 
Patrick  Bryce 
Archibald  Glen  Gardineres  Androvv  Ralstoune 

Meassounes     Johne  Clark 

This  fyfieine  of  Oclo'  1668. 

The  haill  persones  befoir  named  (except  Walter  Stewart  deacon  o£  CounseU 
vveivers  W"'  Scheilles  deacon  of  cowperes  Robert  Boyd  d.  meassones  Jo"  absentes. 
Miller  late  d.  conveiner  Androw  Scot  tailzeo^  Gabriell  Park  cordouner  Ar^ 
Clark  yo'  weiver  Jo°  Clark  meassoune  Walter  Bryce  Jo"  ^^'atsoune  maltmen 
James  Colquhoune  Jo"  Otterburne  W">  Gilmour  Jo"  Berrie  fleshoures  who  vver 
absent)  gave  all  of  them  ther  oathes  to  be  faithful!  and  trew  counselleres  to 
the  deacon  cyveiner  for  ane  zeir  to  com. 

The  same  day  W"'  Zair  is  continowed  clerk  who  being  pnt  gave  his  oath  Zair  clerk. 
as  vse  is. 

The  same  day  Ro'  Andersoune  hammerman  is  admittit  be  plurahtie  of  Andersounc 
voats  off""  to  the  deacon  cj'veiner  for  a  zeir  to  com. 

The  sd  day  ordaines  James  Blair  to  pay  to  Johne  Hutchesoune  y''  late  Warrand. 
off  ten  markes. 

Decimo  sexto  Noveris  166S. 

The  qlk  day  Manasses  Lyll  deacon  cyveiner  w'  the  deacons  of  crafts  and 
ther  brethrine  of  counsell  being  conveined  who  for  the  most  p'  wer  pnt  James 
Blair  the  lait  coUecto""  made  his  compt  qrof  charg  and  discharge  is  as  follows 
and  first  the 

Charge. 
In  the  first  he  charges  himself  w^  the  sowme  following  that  was  Blairs  compt. 

restand  in  liis  hands  at  the  making  of  his  last  compt  extending 

to      .  .  .  .  .  .  .     369  15     8 

Item  w'  q"'  he  receavit  from  Robert  Robesoune  maltman  as  resting 

of  his  gilderie  fyne    ......     120     o     0 

Item  receavit  be  him  fra  James  Ker  hammerman  as  resting  of  his 

gilderie   fyne  ...... 

Item  fra  James  Loudoune  cordouner  as  resting  of  his  gilderie  fyne 

Item  fra  John  Kibles  as  resting  of  his  gilderie  fyne 

Item  receavit  from  Simone  Tennent  as  resting  of  his  gilderie  fyne 


120 

0 

0 

120 

0 

0 

120 

0 

0 

100 

0 

0 

428  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1668 

Item  receavit  fra  Jo°  Park  tailzeo''  as  resting  of  his  gilderie  fyne  100  o  o 
Item  receavit  fra  vmqell  Ro'  Adame  off""  as  ane  p'  of  the  grownd 

awells  for  the  zeir  1666         .  .  .  .  .       20     o     o 

Item  receavit  fra  Jo"  Cauldwell  as  the  half  of  the  bucket  money 

collectit  betwixt  Michaehnes  1666  and  Michaelmas  1667  .  145  o  o 
Item  receavit  from  the  deacones  of  qrter  compts  .  .     206     6     8 

Item  receavit  fra  Alex''  Govean  for  the  arent  of  100  marks  fra 

Mertimes  1666  to  Mertimes  1667       .  .  .  .400 

Item  receavit  fra  David  Miller  for  the  arent  of  500  merks  the  sd 

zeir  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       20    o    o 

Item  receavit  fra  Hew  Corbett  of  Hargray  for  the  arent  of  300 

merks  the  same  zeir  .  .  .  .  .       12     o    o 

Item  receavit  fra  W"  Andersoune  provest  for  the  arent  of  500 

marks  fra  ^^'itsonday  1667  to  Witsonday  1668  .  .       20     o    o 

Item  receavit  fra  Jo°  Scheilles  in  Gorballs  for  the  arent  of  350 

marks  fra  Witsonday  1667  to  Witsonday  1668  .  .       14     o     0 

Item  receavit  fra  James  Hammiltoune  vmqell  [?  uncle]   to  the 

good  man  of  Hayes  for  the  arent  of  250  marks  the  same  zeir  10  0  o 
Item  receavit  fra  Hew  Nisbitt  in  name  of  Walter  PoUok  for  the 

arent  of  1000  marks  qlk  somtyme  was  owand  be  Andrew  King 

the  forsd  zeir  .  .  .  .  .  .       40     o     o 

Item  receavit  of  the  Gorball  rent  the  crope  1667  .  .     202     4     0 

Item  receavit  fra  Peter  Gemmill  pnt  baillie  as  being  the  equal  half 

of  the  bucket  money  collectit  betwixt  Michaelmes  1667  and 

Michaehnes   1668  .....      175     o     o 

Item  receavit  fra  Patrick  Brjxe  qlk  was  owand  be  (  ) 

Hunter  of  Whytsyd  to  the  hous  be  his  band  .  .     220     i     4 

Item  receavit  fra  W"'  Gilmour  flesho''  for  his  sword  .  .         800 

Item  receavit  fra  W"*  Leckie  as  ane  p'  of  the  meall  of  vmqell  James 

Duncan  his  lands  fra  Witsonday  1667  to  Witsonday  1668  .  30  o  0 
Item  receavit  fra  James  Bowie  as  ane  p*  of  the  sd  mealls  the  same 

zeir  .  .  .  .  .  -  .       22     o     o 

Item  receavit  of  the  mealls  of  Robert  Carutheres  lands  be  vertew 

of  ane  de^  viz  fra  Alexi"  Leis  3  li  fra  Jonet  Allansoune  7  li 

inde  .  .  .  .  •  •  .       10     o     o 

Item  receavit  for  the  arent  of  300  marks  fra  James  Man  and  Johne 

Nisbitt  his  ca'uner  fra  Mertimes  1666  to  Mertimes  1667  .  12  o  o 
Item  receavit  fra  Jo"  Selkrig  collecto''  of  the  grownd  anwelles  as 

ane  p'  for  the  zeir  of  God  1667  .  .  .  .       50     o     0 

Item  receavit  fra  Johne  Miller  late  cyveiner  for  the  arent  of  400 

marks  fra  Mertimes  1664  to  Mertimes  1668  .  .       04    o    0 

Suma  ......  2334    7    8 


i668]   RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


429 


Discharge. 
In  the  first  lent  out  to  Jo"  Nisbitt  vounger  merchand  wpon  his 

band  at  ^Mertimes  1667         ..... 
Item  lent  to  Thomas  Scheirer  at  the  sam  terme     . 
Item  deburst   to  the  colledge  collecto''  for  M^  Jo"   Howiesones 

bursour  ....... 

Item  payit  out  for  tvventie  four  water  bolls  of  salt 

Item  deburst  for  bringing  it  ashore  and  selling  of  it   \v'  other 

charges  and  on  waiting  ..... 

Item  deburst  for  nyne  ells  of  cloath  to  be  cloathes  to  the  deacon 

conveiners  oft''  ...... 

Item  deburst  to  the  four  men  in  the  hospitall  for  cloath  to  be  their 

cloathes  and  cloak  and  ane  pair  of  hows  at    28s.  the  ell  ilk 

man  haveing  viij  ell  and  ane  half  extending  to 
Item  deburst  for  the  making  of  the  sd  cloathes     . 
Item  deburst  to  James  Wingatt  ane  of  the  hospitall  to  be  him  ane 

wyd  bodie  coat  w'  hoos  four  ell  . 

Item  deburst  for  making  of  the  sd  coat  and  hows 
Item  deburst  for  4  cloak  buttownes  .... 

Item  deburst  for  turneing  of  thrie  pair  of  breiks  and  mending 

ther   cloathes  ...... 

Item    deburst    for  sex    pair    of   shoon    to    the    sex    men    in    the 

hospitall         ....... 

Item  deburst  for  42  ell  of  sarking  cloath  to  be  twelf  sarks  to  the 

sd  sex  men  ...... 

Item  deburst  to  the  sd  sex  men  in  the  hospitall  for  the  haill  zeir 

ilk  man  48  pund  extending  to  . 

Item  deburst  to  Jo"  Faulconer  weivar      .... 
Item    deburst    to    the    relict    of    vmqell    W"'    Andersoune    cor- 

douner  ....... 

Item    deburst    for    persewing    vmqell    James    Moresounes    relict 

for    qt    shoe    was   owand    to    the    hospitall    for    the    crope 

1667  .  .  .... 

Item  deburst  to  the  clerk  .... 

Item  deburst  to  Jo"  Hutcheson  somtyme  offr 

Item  deburst  to  the  clerks  man  for  extracting  of  the  burgess 

Item  deburst  for  dressing  of  the  door  of  the  hospitall 

Item  deburst  for  psewing  of  vmqell  W™  Adames  relict 

Item  deburst  for  taking  seaseing  of  Ro'  Caruthers  land  and  psewing 

at  the  toune  court  and  to  the  clerks  man  for  his  pains  and 

for  parchment  ...... 

Item  deburst  for  mending  of  ane  door  in  vmqell  James  Duncans 

land  .....,, 


Blairs  compt 

333 

6 

8 

200 

0 

0 

66 

13 

4 

175 

0 

0 

8    9 


14  10     o 


47 

12 

0 

8 

0 

0 

5 

12 

0 

I 

0 

0 

0 

6 

0 

O      0 


O      0 


17  17    0 


288 

I 


3     I 

0 

20     0 

0 

.         6  13 

4 

0    6 

0 

0    4 

0 

2  13 

0 

9    4 


430  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1668 

Item  deburst  for  coalls  to  the  hows        .  .  .  .       16  10    o 

Item  deburst  to  the  relict  of  vmqell  Gabriell  Conynghame  for  the 
few  dewtie  of  som  land  in  the  foot  of  the  Dry-gait  lyferented 
to  her  .  .  .  .  .  .  .         8  10    o 

Item  lent  to  James  Ker  mer"*  wpon  his  band  at  Mertimes  1668     800     0     o 


Sum  a 


2041     o 


Bryce 
collecto'. 


Swa  charge  and  discharge  being  compeared  ther  rests  in  the 
compters  hand  two  hunderethe  four  scoir  threttine  pund  seavine 
shilling. 

The  same  [day]  Patrick  Bryce  maltman  was  electit  collecto''  to  the  hous 
for  ane  year  to  com  who  being  pnt  did  accept  and  gave  his  oath  as  vse  is  as 
also  Robert  Andersoune  off''. 


Burges  sQver.  The  Same  day  the  sd  Patrick  Biyce  producit  for  the  last  zeirs  fourtie 

seavine  pund  sexten  shilling  eight  pennies  and  he  is  to  be  chargit  thenvith  and 
w*  what  \\"as  o«and  be  James  Blair  the  last  collecto"'. 

Certaiae  of  The  same  day  the  persones  following  gave  ther  oathes  as  counsellers  to 

swome!"^^        the  deacon  cyveiner  for  ane  yeir  to  com  being  absent  when  the  rest  gave  ther 

oathes  viz  \A'alter  Ste\\ert  Walter  Bryce  Jo"  Miller  Jo°  Watsoune  Ro'  Boyd 


Bands  put  in 

the  bo-t. 


Memorandum  ther  is  put  in  the  box  the  bands  following  \'iz  James  Kers 
band  for  Soo  tl  Thomas  Sheirers  band  for  200  "li  and  ther  is  delyverit  to  Patrick 
Brj'ce  collecto''  the  bands  following  ether  to  get  vp  the  money  or  put  them  to 
executioune  viz  Jo°  Kibles  band  for  four  scoir  marks  Jo"  Nisbitt  and  his 
ca'uner  for  500  marks  Item  James  Lowdoune  his  band  for  120  1i  and  the  late 
cyveiners  for  400  marks. 

FoUou-es  the  invenier  of  the  sowmes  of  money  awand  to  the  crafts  hospitall 
in  Glasgoiit  be  band  ivith  the  an  rents  yrof. 

In  the  first  awand  be  Alex""  Govane  hamerman  100  marks  qrof  ther  is  ane 

years  an  rent  yrof  awand  at  Mertimes  1668. 
Item  awand  be  David  Miller  merchand  500  merks  qrof  ther  will  be  ane  j^ears 

an  rent  yrof  awand  at  the  sd  terme. 
Item  awand  be  Hew  Corbet  of  Hardgray  300  merks  qrof  there  is  ane  years 

an  rent  awand  at  the  sd  terme  of  Mertimes  1668. 
Item  awand  be  William  Andersone  provest  500  merks  qrof  there  is  ane  years 

ail  rent  awand  at  \\'itsonday  1668. 
Item  awand  be  John  Scheills  in  Gorbells  and  his  caul's  350  merks  qrof  ther  will 

be  ane  years  aii  rent  awand  at  the  sd  terme  of  \\'itsonday  1669. 
Item  awand  be  James  Hamiltoune  vncle  to  the  guid  man  of  Hays  250  merks 

qrof  ther  is  ane  years  aii  rent  awand  at  the  sd  terme  of  Witsonday  1669. 


1669]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  431 

Item  awand  be  the  Laird  of  Netherpollok  Thomas  Craufuird  and  Hew  Neisbit 

his  caul's  1000  merks  qlk  som  tyme  was  awand  be  Andrew  King  and  ther 

will  be  ane  years  air  rent  yrof  awand  at  the  sd  terme  of  Witsonday  1669. 
Item  awand  be  James  Man  and  John  Neisbit  his  cau''  300  merks  qrof  ther 

is  ane  years  an  rent  awand  at  Mertimes  1668. 
Item  awand  be  John  Miller  lait  deacon  cyvinar  400  merks  qrof  ther  will  be 

ane  years  an  rent  awand  at  Mertimes  1669. 
Item  awand  be  James  Ker  Niniane  Andersoune  and  Daniell  Purdoune  his 

cau^s  aught  hundreth  punds  qlk  was  lent  at  Mertimes  1668  and  ther  will 

be  ane  years  an  rent  yrof  awand  at  Mertimes  1669. 
Item  awand  be  Thomas  Scheirer  and  his  caul's  twa  hundreth  punds  qrof  ther 

is  ane  years  aii  rent  awand  at  Mertimes  1668. 
Item  awand  be  John  Neisbit  and  his  caul's  500  merks. 
Item  awand  be  John  Kibills  four  scoir  merks. 
Item  awand  be  John  Loudoune  and  his  cau''  ane  hundreth  and  twentie  punds. 

Deciino  octavo  Deceris  1668. 
The  qlk  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  with  Baillie  Fairie  and  deacones  of  Miller. 
crafts  being  conveined  who  for  ye  most  pairt  wer  pnt  ordaines  Thomas  Miller 
Wright  to  be  admitted  gildbroy^  but  he  to  give  a  band  only  for  ane  hundreth 
markes  to  the  hous  to  be  payit  betwixt  and  ye  first  of  Octo''  nixt  to  come  and 
he  to  pay  no  further  for  his  gildrie  fyne  for  good  causs  knoune  to  y"'. 

The  same  da}'  its  concluded  the  collector  sett  Ro'  Caruthers  houss  w'  his  Caruthers 
consent  or  at  least  Ro'  to  find  ye  tennent  and  ye  coUecto''  to  sett  the  houss  if 
he  find  ye  tennent  sufficient  vy''wayes  not. 


houss. 


.\ngous. 


Vigesimo  secnndo  Januarij  1669. 
The  same  day  W"  Angous  indweller  within  this  burgh  is  booked  prenties  Prenteis 
with  Andrew  Ratleidge  feltmaker  in  his  tred  for  fyve  yeares  as  prenteis  and 
twa  yeares  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  ye  indenter  made  betwixt  y"^  dated 
the  xviij  day  of  Dece''  last  b\'  past. 

Nono  Febrij  i66g. 
The  qlk  day  George  Neisbit  sone  to  George  Neisbit  Paroch  of  Rapho  and  Prenteis 
Countie  of  Dunigall  in   Irland  is  booked  prenteis  w'  James  Elphingstoune 
glaswright  burges  of  this  burgh  during  ye  space  of  seavine  yeares  cyforme  to 
ye  indenter  daitit  att  Mauchlein  the  twentie  sex  day  of  March  1668. 

Vigesimo  Martij  1669. 
The  same  day  Johne  Hoome  sone  naturall  to  vmqll  W"  Hoome  candlmaker  Prenteis 
burges  of  this  burgh  is  bookit  prenteis  with  John  Hoome   elder  candlmaker 
burges  yrof  his  guidfyer  in  his  tread  and  caUing  of  making  of  candle  and  that 
dureing  the  space  of  seavine  years  as  prenteis  and  twa  years  for  meit  and  fie 
conforme  to  the  indento""  of  the  dait  of  thir  pnts. 


Hoome. 


432 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1669 


Bailie  James 
Farie  preses 
\ipon  the 
absence  or 
demise  of 
Menasses  Lyie 
deac" 
conveener. 


Gorball  rent. 


Warrand. 


Hall  preces. 


Anent  ye 
cyteinowa'uue 
of  deacones. 


Baillie  Farie 
and  Jo°  Hall 
as  represent- 
ing the  deac° 
conveener. 


Nono  Aiigustj  1669. 
Conveined  James  Fairie  baillie  and  w'  him  Jo"  Wood  deacon  of 
cordoners  W™  Wallace  visito''  of  maltmen  Alex''  Dainziell  deacon  of 
Wrights  Walt  Stewart  deacone  of  weavers  W"i  Sheills  deacon  of  cowpers 
James  Gilmour  d.  of  flesho''s  John  Scot  d.  of  ba.xters  Ro'  Tennent 
deacone  of  gaimers  and  Patrick  Bryce  collecto''. 

The  sd  day  tlie  forsd  baillie  and  deacones  abovespeit  being  conveined  for 
heiring  ye  compt  of  ye  Gorball  rent  the  cropt  1668  the  aforsd  Patrick  Bryce 
collecto''  charges  himselfe  w'  nyne  hundreth  twentie  ane  punds  sex  shilling 
eight  pennies  qlk  is  all  he  lies  receavit  the  sd  cropt  for  ye  trade  pairt  out  of 
ye  sd  lands  cyforme  to  ye  feair  of  Gorballs  aff  ye  qlk  y''  is  to  be  rebaited  four 
scoir  thrie  punds  vj  s.  viij  d.  payit  to  ye  colledge  collecto""  as  a  p'  of  ye  stipend 
of  ye  minister  of  Goveane.  Sua  rests  eight  hundreth  threttie  eight  punds  qlk 
is  to  be  divydit  amongst  ye  treds  cyforme  to  y""  so\\mes  wpon  ye  lands  of 
Gorballs  qlk  after  calcula'une  cyforme  to  ilk  thousand  marks  of  twentie  ane 
thousand  marks  extends  to  twentie  seavine  punds  vij  d.  and  ordaines  the  sd 
Patrick  Biyce  to  deburst  ye  sam3'ne  to  y™  accordingly  wpon  y^  discharges. 

The  sd  day  ordaines  Patrick  Br\'ce  collecto''  to  pay  to  Thomas  Raltoune 
four  punds  for  his  supplie. 

Decinio  tcrtio  Septe'is  1669. 
The  sd  day  y''  being  conveined  Jo"  Hall  chj'rurgian  by  coiiiand  of  ye 
provest  and  baillies  to  con\-ein  ye  deacones  q"  ye  nixt  electioune  of  ane  deacon 
cyveiner  and  w^  him  the  deacones  of  hamermen  the  visitC"  of  maltmen  the 
deacones  of  cordoners  skinners  chynirgians  \\'rights  weavers  cowpers  bonet- 
makers  flesho's  w«  ye  visito''  of  gaimers  and  James  Davidsone  as  repnting 
the  tailzeoJ^s  the  aforsd  haill  persones  all  in  voce  ncminc  cytradicenie  allowed 
the  sd  Jo"  Hall  to  preceid  in  place  of  ye  d.  conveiner  q'l  the  new  electioune  of 
ane  deacon  cyveiner  and  y'  he  convein  the  deacones  for  y*  effect  q"  y"  and 
doe  all  things  incumbent  to  y'  office  during  ye  sd  space. 

The  same  day  it  is  statut  and  ordained  be  ye  sd  persones  that  notw'- 
standing  of  any  act  made  of  befor  that  if  it  fall  out  \^  any  of  the  pnt  deacones 
be  conteinowed  as  deacones  of  y''  caUing  for  a  year  to  come  that  they  sail  be 
cyteinowed  according  and  y'  calling  who  does  so  sail  be  frie  of  any  vnlaw 
cyteined  in  any  act  made  in  the  contrair  of  befor. 

Vigesimo  septiino  Scpte^is  1669. 
Conveined  James  Fairie,  baillie,  Jo"  Hall  as  repnting  ye  d. 
cyveiner  w*  ye  deacones  of  hamermen  cordoners  visito''  of  maltmen 
deacones  of  wrights  baxters  weavers  chinirgians  coupers  skinners 
fleschoi's  visito''  of  gaimers  w'  ye  old  deacones  of  tailzo''s  chirurgians 
weavers  skinners  bonnetmakers  flesho^s  cowpers  and  measounes. 


1669]   RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


433 


The  same  day  be  pluralitie  of  vots  Ro'  Stein  cordoner  in  regaird  of  his  stein  placed 
povertie  is  appoyntit  to  be  placed  in  the  craftis  hospitall  in  that  place  last  hospftaii. 


occupyed    be   Jo"  Andersone  cordoner    and 
according  as  ye  rest  of  ye  poor  men  y''in  gets. 


to    have  his  allowance  v''intill 


Decimo  tertio  Octo'is  1669. 

The  samyne  day  the  deacones  of  craftis  and  yf  counsell  being  conveined 
for  electing  thrie  persones  of  y''  number  to  be  pntit  to  ye  magistrats  and 
counsell  of  yis  burgh  y'  ane  of  them  may  be  choysen  deacon  cyveiner  y^oi  for 
a  year  to  come  be  pluralitie  of  \'ots  ye  psones  fallowing  wer  electit  to  ye  effect 
forsd  viz  James  Fairie  lait  baillie  Jo°  Wood  deacone  of  cordoners  and  W™ 
Wallace  visito''  of  maltmen  and  ye  sd  lyts  to  be  pntit  be  ye  deacones  of  hamer- 
men  and  tailzeo'"s. 

Therafter  ye  sd  W™  Wallace  was  electit  deacon  cyveiner. 

Decimo  quarto  Octo'is. 

The  samyne  day  ye  sd  W™  Wallace  deacon  cyveiner  did  choyse  ye  psones 
fallowing  to  be  on  his  counsell  viz 


Wallace  diccn 
cyveiner. 


Deacones 


Androw  Purdoune 
Simeon  Tennent 
Jo°  Wood 
Daniell  Purdoune 
ArO  Glen 
Jo°  Clark  measoune 


Jo"  Findlay 
Alexf  Dainiell 
Ar<i  Bogle 
Rot  Bogle 
James  Scheilles 
W"  Gihnor 
Jo"  Walker 
W™  Hutchesoune 


Hamermen 


James  Fairie 
Alex''  Jafray 
Alex"'  Goveane 
Jo"  Leiper 
Hendrie  Watt 


Jo"  Watsoune  baillie 

Chirurgians 


Jo"  HaU 
Adam  Gray 


Tailzeo's 


2D 


Jo"  Miller 
James  Blair 
Androw  Scot 
James  Davidsoune 
Jo"  Gilcreist 


Maltmen 


Jo"  Miller 
Patrick  Bryce 
Walter  Bryce 
Jo"  Park 
Ard  Sheilles 


434 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1669 


Persones  to  be 
bretherin  of  ye 
deane  oj  gilus 
counsell. 


Gairdiners. 

Clark. 
Officer. 


Cordoners 

James  Thomesoune 

Wrights 

James  CoUhoune 

Jo°  Listoune 

James  Elphingstone 

\Vm  Watsoune 

George  Russall 

Coupers 

W""  Sheilles 

Gabriell  Park 

Rot  Findlay 

Baxters 

Jo"  Scot 
Thomas  Scot 

Measones 

Ro'  Boyd 

Flesho''s 

James  Gilmo''  elder 

Weavers 

Walter  Stewart 
Patrik  Bryce 

James  Gilmo^  yor 

Jqi  Clark 

Bonnetmakers  Ninian  Spens 

Skinners 

W™  Goveane 

Gairdiners 

Ro'  Tennent 

Jo"  Cauldwall 

Androw  Ralstoune 

The  samyne  day  ye  sd  haill  persones  all  of  y™  y'  wer  pnt  gave  y'  oathes 
as  vse  is. 

The  sam\Tie  day  ye  sd  W"^  ^^^allace  deacon  cyveiner  w*  the  forsd  persones 
who  for  j'e  most  pairt  pnt  having  given  y'"  oathes  and  conveined  as  sd  is  for 
electing  four  of  y''  number  to  be  for  ye  deane  of  gild  his  bretherin  of  counsell 
of  ye  craftis  rank  be  pluralitie  of  vots  thir  persones  fallowing  wer  electit  and 
choysen  viz  the  sd  James  Fairie  Jo°  Hall  James  Collhoun  Patrik  Bryce  maltman 
and  it  was  ordained  y*  ye  sd  d.  cyveiner  pnt  y""  as  vse  is. 

The  same  day  be  pluralitie  of  vots  it  was  vnanimously  concludit  y*  ye 
gairdiners  have  t\\a  men  on  the  hous  w'  yeir  visito''  they  paying  yearly  fyve 
marks  farder  nor  they  wont  qlks  maks  ten  marks  yearh'. 

The  same  day  W™  Zair  is  conteinowed  dark  for  a  year  to  come. 

The  same  day  Ro'  Andersoune  is  cyteinowed  officer  for  a  j'ear  to  come 
who  pnt  acceptit  and  gave  his  oath  as  vse  is. 


Duodecimo  Nove^is  i66g. 

The  qlk  day  W"  Wallace  deacon  cyveiner  w*  ye  deacones  of  craftis  and 
y''  bretherin  of  counsell  being  conveined  for  heiring  of  Patrik  Bryce  y''  lait 
collecto''  his  compt  of  his  intromissioune  and  debursment  of  ye  rent  of  ye  sd 
hospitall  calUt  the  craftis  hospitall  and  they  finding  that  he  had  only  charged 
himselfe  ^v'  ye  sou-me  of  ane  hundreth  and  twentie  punds  as  having  rece' 
the  samyne  fra  James  Blair  y''  former  collecto"'  q^'as  be  his  compt  he  is  fund 
restand  awand  in  twa  hundreth  four  scoir  threttine  punds  seavine  shilhng 
and  they  having  takine  much  paines  and  gone  about  for  cleiring  y'  mistaik 
after  great  search   they  fund  y'  ye  sd  James  Blair  had  charged  himselfe  w' 


1669]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  435 

ye  sowme  of  ane  hundreth  and  tvventie  punds  as  rece'  be  him  fra  James  Loudoune 
cordoner  as  his  guildrie  fyne  q'"as  he  did  receave  non  of  it  but  gave  in  ye  band 
qi'with  he  should  have  discharged  himselfe  and  y'  he  had  charged  himselfe  \v' 
ane  vy'  hundreth  and  twentie  punds  qlk  he  had  rece'  fra  Thomas  Kibles  tailyeo' 
as  his  guildrie  fyne  q''as  he  had  only  rece'  ane  hundreth  marks  y''of  and  \v' 
ye  four  scoir  markes  restand  ye  sd  Patrick  Bryce  intromitted  \v'  as  his  compt 
wnderwryttin  beires  and  charged  with  ye  sd  ane  hundreth  tvventie  punds  qlk 
he  should  [have]  rece'  fra  the  sd  James  Lowdoune.  Sua  they  fund  y'  the  sd 
James  Blair  had  not  discharged  himselfe  w'  ye  sd  ane  hundreth  and  twentie 
punds  y'  was  awand  be  ye  sd  James  Lowdoune  be  ingiving  his  band  at  the 
making  of  his  compt  q''wpon  they  proceidit  to  ye  heiring  and  auditing  of  Patrick 
Bryce  his  compt  q'of  charge  and  discharge  is  as  fallowes. 

Charge. 

In  ye  first  ye  compter  charges  himselfe  vv'  ye  sowme  fallowing 

rece'  be  him 
Item  w'  q'  he  rece'  fra  James  Blair  last  coUecto''  at  the  making 

of  his  compt  y°  restand  in  his  hands  .  .  .     120     o     4 

Item  w*  q'  he  rece'  for  25  bolls  French  salt  at  xij  li  per  boll  inde  300  o  o 
Item  yt  he  rece'  fra  Thomas  Kibles  tailyeo''  restand  of  his  gildrie 

fyne  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       53    6    8 

Item  w'  qt  he  rece'  fra  James  Bowie  mefd  as  being  a  yeares 

main  of  ane  laigh  hous  and  brew  hous  als  a  p'  of  v/  James 

Duncanes   lands   fra   Witsonday   1668   to   Witsonday   1669 

inde  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       22    o    o 

Item  w'  q'  he  rece'  fra  W"  Lekie  for  ye  sd  yeares  maill  of  ane  heigh 

hous  and  vyi's  as  a  p'  of  ye  sd  lands  .  .  .       30    o    o 

Item  w'  q'  he  rece'  out  of  Ro*  Caruthers  lands  fra  Jo^  Allasone  xiiij  li 

fra  v/  VV™  Boyd  xiiij  li  ij  s.  ij  d.  fra  W"  Stapert  vj  li  extending 

to  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       34    2    2 

Item  rece'  be  him  fra  Jo"  Miller  lait  conveiner  of  prifill  so^vme 

y*  was  awand  be  him  to  ye  hospitall  be  band 
Item  fra  him  of  bygaine  aii  rents  .... 

Item  fra  Jo"  Selkrig  as  a  p'  of  ye  few  dewties  awand  to  ye  hospitall 

for  ye  year  1668       ...... 

Item  w'  ye  hospitalles  p'  of  ye  Gorballs  rent  ye  sd  year    . 

Item  fra  Jo"  Neisbit  for  ye  aii  rent  of  fyve  hundreth  marks  fra 

Mertimes  1667  to  Witsonday  1669  .  .  .       30    o    o 

Item  fra  David  Miller  for  ye  afi  rent  of  500  marks  fra  Mertimes 

1667  to  Mertimes  1668         .  .  .  .  .       20    0    o 

Item  fra  Alex''  Goveane  for  ye  aii  rent  of  ane  hundreth  marks  ye 

sd  year         .  .  .  ,  .  .  .400 


266  13 

( 

4 

) 

38    5 
216    4 

0 
0 

142 

10 

0 

200 

0 

0 

32 

4 

4 

6o 

0 

0 

30 

0 

0 

436  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1669 

Item  fra  Thomas  Sheirer  for  ye  an  rent  of  thrie  hundreth  marks  fra 

Mertimes  1667  to  Mertimes  1668       .  .  .  .       12     o     o 

Item  with  y'  he  rece'  fra  James  Man  for  ye  an  rent  of  vy^  300  marks 

ye  sd  year  .  .  .  .  .  .       12    0    o 

Item  fra  the  Laird  of  Hargray  for  ye  an  rent  of  vy^  300  marks 

fra  Mertimes  1667  to  Mertimes  1668  .  .  .       12     o    o 

Item  fra  the  Laird  of  Pollok  for  ye  an  rent  of  1000  marks  fra 

\Mtsonday  1668  to  \Mtsonday  1669     inde    .  .  .       40     o     o 

Item  fra  James  Hailtoune  broy""  to  ye  Laird  of  Hags  for  ye  an 

rent  of  250  marks  fra  Witsonday  1668  to  Witsonday  1669       10    o     0 
Item   fra  Donald  M^'Gilcreist  as  ye  halfe  of  ye  buckit  monye 

receavit  be  him  ye  sds  last  3'ear       .... 
Item  fra  Jo°  Jonstoune  as  restand  of  his  guildrie  fyne     . 
Item  rece'  fra  James  Loudoune  as  restand  of  his  guildrie  fyne 
Item  fra  Ro'  Dickie  as  restand  of  his  gildrie  fyne 
Item  fra  James  Crawfiird  as  restand  of  his  gildrie  iyne    . 
Item  from  ye  haill  deacones  in  name  of  qrter  compts  for  supplie 

of  ye  poor  in  the  hospitall  ....     206     6     8 

Item  rece'  fra  four  new  deacones  cyforme  to  ye  ordour  viz  the 

visito'^  of  maltmen  the  deacones  of  hamermen  tailyeo'"s  and 

coupers  at  aught  punds  per  peice     inde       .  .  .       32     o     o 

Suma  of  the  charge  is       .  .  .  .       (  ) 

Discharge. 
In  the  first  to  the  sex  men  in  the  hous  at  twelfe  pund  in  the  quarter 

ilk  ane  of  them  per  peice  in  the  year  is       . 
Item  for  alevine  monethes  coalls  at  xxx  s.  per  moneth  is 
Item  to  fyve  of  the  men  in  the  hous  for  ther  showes  at  xxx  s.  the 

pair  ....... 

Item  to  the  sd  fyve  men  for  ther  sarks  at  V'iij  s.  the  ell  is 

Item  to  the  clerk  for  his  fiall       ..... 

Item  for  the  exsyse  of  salt  as  the  discharge  vnder  the  collector's 

hand  beirs  .  .  .  .  .  .       54     o    o 

Item  to  ane  distrest  tailzo''  at  the  count  making  by  ordour  of  the 

deacon  cyviner  and  some  of  the  deacones     . 
Item  to  severall  poor  persounes  wpon  y''  suplicatiounes 
Item  wpon  ane  ordo""  for  severall  poore  wnder  the  clarks  hand  at 

Hallowmes  court       ...... 

Item  for  naills  to  mend  the  back  doore  and  ane  candle    . 

Item  to  James  Andersoune  for  the  hous  pairt  of  the  few  dewtie  for 

the  cropt  1667  as  his  discharge  givine  to  the  toune  ther  beirs       21  13     4 
Item  for  lether  and  making  of  fyftie  buckets  cj'forme  to  a  particular 

compt  made  befoir  the  lait  deacon  cyviner  .  .     179  18     o 


88 

0 

0 

16 

10 

0 

7 

10 

0 

14 

0 

0 

20 

0 

0 

2 

18 

0 

29 

10 

0 

102 

12 

0 

0 

2 

6 

669]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


437 


Item  to  tv\a  men  of  drink  money  for  shewing  the  sds  buckets  and 

hcoring    yrof  .  .  .  .  .  .         8  12     o 

Item  for  marking  \v'  Glasgow  and  A.  C.  .  .  .         2     6     S 

Item  at  coinand  of  the  deacon  cyviner  to  helpe  Gilbert  Currie  out 

of   ye   tolbuith  .  .  .  .  .  .600 

Item  to  the  colledge  facto''  for  Howisounes  bursour  as  his  dis- 
charge beirs  .  .  .  .  .  .       66  13     4 

Item  lent  to  Androw  Morsoune  vpon  band  and  his  cau's  at  Wit- 

sonday  last  ......     266  13     4 

Item  to  Ro'  Andersoune  for  his  hall       .  .  .  .       20    o    o 

Item  to  him  to  buy  a  pair  of  shoone       .  .  .  .200 

Item  to  buy  ane  kist  and  winding  sheit  to  v/  George  Crightoune 

weaver  .  .  .  .  .  .  .         2  18     o 

Item  to  Thomas  Raltoune  when  the  Gorboll  rent  was  castine     .         400 
Item  to  v/  Gabriell  Conynghames  relict  wpon  her  discharge     .         8  10     o 
Item  to  Baillie  Fairie  for  our  pairt  of  the  fractioune  of  the  millitia 

hors  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       13     o     o 

Item  lent  to  M""  Hew  Wallace  and  Jo"  his  brother  and  y'  cau^ 

wpon  band  ......     666  13     4 

Item  for  irone  cleiks  naills  and  cawing  them  vp  lor  hanging  34 

buckets  vpon  .  .  .  .  .  .270 

Item  for  my  paines  in  seiking  in  the  Gorbell  rent  .  .        16  13     4 

Item  for  allevine  threve  of  wheit  strae  to  thick  the  houss  at  the 
north  end  of  the  hospitall  qlk  pertenit  to  v/  James  Stewart 
at  los.  the  threve  .  .  .  .  .         5  10     o 

Item  to  Androw  Finock  for  thicking  yrof  and  a  man  to  serve  him         280 
Item  for  15  losons  .  .  .  .  .  .         o  18    o 

Item  wairit  out  for  losons  in  v/  James  Duncanes  lands    .  .         150 

Item  for  latches  to  the  windows  of  the  same  land  .  .         o  15     6 

Item  for  a  broad  stane  vnder  the  jawhoU  for  leiding  hewing  and 

laying  of  it  .  .  .  .  .  .120 

Item    for  dressing    the    chamber    braiss   daills    pillers   [  ] 

muller  .  .  .  .  .  .  .160 

Item  for  edging  a  peic  dyke  and  for  lyme  and  warkmanship  yrto        o  10     o 
Item  for  mending  the  dyk  of  Ro*  Caruthers  lands  .  .         060 


Summa  of  the  discharge  is 

ane  thowsand  aught  hundreth  fourtie  seavine  punds  twa 
shillings. 


Swa  charge  and  discharge  being  compaired  ther  rests  in  the 
compters  hand  threttie  twa  punds  seavine  shilUng  twa  pe»mies  qlk 
he  is  to  delyver  to  the  subsequent  collecto''. 


438 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1669 


Qlk  compt  befoir  wryttin  being  at  lenth  read  callcullat  and  laid  both 
charge  and  discharge  yrin  cytained  was  ratified  allowed  and  approvine  and 
the  sd  compter  dischargit  accordinlie  he  pa3'and  in  the  sd  sowme  of  threttie 
twa  pund  seavine  shilling  twa  pennies. 

The  same  day  the  sd  Patrick  Bryce  compter  forsd  be  pluraUtie  of  vots  is 
continowed  collector  for  a  year  to  come  wha  being  present  did  accept  and  gave 
his  oath  as  vse  is. 

Item  he  produced  instanthe  the  last  years  burgess  silver  being  threttie 
fyve  pund  fj'ftine  shilhng  four  pennies  qlk  is  left  in  his  hand  and  he  is  to  be 
chargit  yrw'  at  the  making  of  his  nixt  compt. 

Item  he  produced  the  bands  fallowing  viz  ane  band  granted  be  the  lait 
Bishope  of  the  lies  twa  sones  as  prmlls  and  Hilhous  ther  brother  in  law  as 
can""  for  them  for  payment  of  the  sowme  of  ane  thowsand  merks  Item  ane 
band  of  four  hundreth  merks  awand  be  (  )   Morsoun  mefd  as 

prmll  and  John  and  Thomas  Young  his  caul's  qrof  the  an  rent  is  awand  since 
Witsonday  last. 

Bryce  bursar.  The  same  day  that  place  of  bursarrie  at  this  hous  presenta'une  that  was 

last   occupayed   be    (  )    Watsone   sone    to   v/    (  ) 

Watsone  is  granted  to  Patrick  Bryce  sone  laiill  to  Patrick  Bryce  w  eaver  burges 
of  this  burgh  cj-forme  to  M^^  John  Howiesounes  mortifica'une. 

The  same  day  thes  who  war  ellectit  to  be  on  the  deacon  cyviners  counsell 
for  a  year  to  come  wha  ware  absent  at  the  last  meitting  war  present  this  day 
and  acceptit  and  gave  y''  oathes. 


Ure  in 
hospitall. 


Currie 
depryxed. 


The  same  day  John  Wre  weaver  is  admittit  and  receavit  in  the  hospitall 
and  appoyntit  to  be  sustained  yrin  w'  the  rest  according  to  vse  and  wont. 

The  same  day  John  Currie  tailzo''  wha  was  placed  in  the  hospitall  as  ane 
of  the  sex  poore  men  is  this  day  for  his  most  baise  and  ruid  cariage  and  for 
his  trubling  and  mollesting  of  the  poore  men  yrin  he  is  yrfor  debarred  and  putt 
out  of  the  sd  hospitall  and  all  benefeit  he  can  clame  yrby. 


Act  anent 
Corbet. 


Decimo  qidnto  Novembris  1669. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacon  conviner  and  haill  deacones  of  craftis  being  convined 
in  Hutchesounes  hospitall  except  the  deacone  of  weavers  it  was  concludit  be 
them  all  that  Robert  Corbet  cordouner  sail  have  the  halfe  of  John  Vre  weaver 
his  pentioune  qlk  he  should  have  out  of  the  crafts  hospitall  and  that  dureing 
the  sd  Robert  his  lyf  tyme  provyding  this  act  be  not  prejudiciall  to  the  forme 
of  the  hous  and  former  actis  yrof. 


1670]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  439 

The  same  day  ordaines  the  clerk  to  sub  ane  comissioune  to  James  Bryce  mess''  Comissiouiie 
to  vphft  the  small  ground  anwells  belonging  to  the  hospitall  for  the  space  of  ane     '^^'^^" 
year  to  come  and  to  gi\e  discharges  yrvpon  to  thes  fra  q'"  he  receaves  money. 

The  same  day  ordaines  the  collecto""  to  pay  to  the  poor  of  severall  treads  Act  anent  the 
accordine  as  is  sett  doune  in  ane  paper  contening  ther  severall  names  and  p°°'^''' 
designa-unes  and  that  for  ther  helpe  and  suppUe  extending  in  haill  to  the 
sowme  of  ane  hundreth  seavine  punds  seavine  shilHng  four  pennies. 

The  same  day  ordaines  the  collecto"'  to  bay  ane  new  clocii  to  the  deacon  Act  aneut 

jv,  the  oS'. 

cyvmers  ow. 

The  same  day  Johne  Currie  wha  was  formerhe  depryvit  and  putt  out  of  Curnerepoait. 
the  hous  is  this  day  againe  reponit  and  readmittit  yrintill  vpon  this  conditioune 
and  nae  vy^wayes  that  gif  ever  he  be  fund  to  misbehave  himselfe  as  formerhe 
to  be  exterpit  out  of  the  hous  and  never  to  have  benefit  yrin  yrafter. 

The  same  day  it  is  inactit  statut  and  ordained  be  the  deacone  cyviner  Nothing  to  be 
deacones  of  craftis  and  others  present  with  them  that  no  tread  sail  exact  any  bookiug'^of 
dew  for  booking  of  prenteiss  quhas  prenteis  lies  are  payit  by  cheratie  as  also  poorprenteiss. 
that  nae  clerks  of  any  craft  qtsomever  exact  anything  ai^  the  prenteiss  of  the 
qualitie  foirsd  for  booking  of  thenr. 

At  Hukhisouncs  hospilali  the  twcnlk  fyve  day  oj  Maij  1670. 

Convined  Wilham  Wallace  deacon  cyviner  and  with  him  John 
Hall  James  Fairie  the  deacones  of  hamermen  tailzo''s  chirurganes 
John  Findlay  Patrick  Bryce  maltmen  the  deacones  of  skinners  cor- 
douners  weavers  wrights  cowpers  and  visito''  of  gairners. 

The  same  day  the  sds  deacon  cyviner  and  John  Hall  made  report  of  ther  Report  deacoa 
last  acting  and  dehgence  in  Ed''  being  sent  thither  be  ordo''  of  the  deacones.       Haii"^"^  '^'^ 

The  same  day  ordaines  the  deacones  of  hamermen  tailzoi's  and  cordouners  Act  anent  the 
to  take  trayell  of  the  estait  of  the  repive  treads  w'in  this  burgh  and  to  make  conditToune  of 
ane  proportionall  cast  amongst  them  for  vplyf ting  money  for  mentaning  the  "^^  treads. 
crafts  hberties. 

The  same  day  ordaines  James  Fairie  John  Hall  the  deacones  of  hamermen  To  speak  to 
tailzo''s  and  baxters  to  speak  the  provest  James  Campbell  anent  the  secureing      ^  Pi'oves  . 
of  the  treads  in  y''  ancient  hberties  in  regaird  the  counsell  is  to  send  vp  ane 
comissioner  to  the  kings  majestic. 

Vigesimo  octavo  Maij  1670. 
Conveined  the  deacon  conviner  with  James  Fairie  John  Hall  the 
deacones  of  hamermen  tailzo''s  and  cordouners  chirurganes  skinners 
wrights  cowpers  fleshours  bonnetmakers. 


electit 
comissioner. 


440  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1670 

Toprovyd  The  same  day  thes  deacones  \\ha  war  formerlie  appoyntit  to  cognoss 

money.  vpon  the  stait  of  the  treads  made  ther  report  yi'anent  conforme  to  ane  minot 

y''of  sett  doune  and  is  now  in  the  hands  of  the  deacon  cyviner  and  it  is  con- 
cludit  \MianimusUe  that  ther  be  ane  hundreth  merkis  of  ilk  thowsand  made 
in  reddines  w'  all  expeditioune  for  defending  ther  ancient  hberties  and  rightis 
and  for  obtaning  ane  ratifica'mie  of  the  samyne. 

Al  the  craftis  liospitall  the  penult  day  of  Maij. 

Convined  WiUiam  Wallace  deacon  cyviner  James  Fairie  John 
Hall  the  deacones  of  hamermen  tailzo''s  cordouners  wxights  skinners 
chirurgians  fleshours  bonnetmakers  coupers  ^o^  Findlay  Patrick 
Biyce  maltmen  the  lait  deacon  of  weavers  and  James  Elpinstoxme 
glasswright. 

James  Fairie  The  same  day  the  haill  persounes  above  namit  and  designit  did  concluid 

\Mianimuslie  that  ther  be  ane  comissioner  choisen  out  of  ther  number  to  repair 
to  Londone  or  elswher  to  supphcat  the  kings  most  excellant  majestie  for  ane 
ratifica'une  of  the  treads  ancient  hberties  and  to  gaird  against  all  who  sail 
seik  to  infringe  the  samyne  and  for  this  effect  the  sd  James  Fairie  was  ellectit 
and  choysen  to  be  ther  sd  comissioner  qr\vpon  ther  was  ane  comissioune  sub' 
and  delyverit  to  him  and  instructiounes  vnder  the  deacon  cyviners  hand. 

Money  to  be  The  same  day  it  is  ordained  that  ane  hundreth  and  fyftie  pound  sterhng 

a  vancit.  ^^  advancit  with  all  dehgence  be  the  repi\'e  treads  of  this  burgh  and  givine  to 

their  sd  comissioner  for  effectwating  the  premiss  and  defraying  his  charges 

at  leist  to  have  the  samjme  in  readines  vpon  ane  call. 

Decimo  nono  Jiilij  1670. 

Convined  WiUiam  Wallace  deacon  cyviner  and  with  him  James 
Fairie  John  Hall  the  deacones  of  hamermen  tailzo''s  cordouners 
skinners  chirurgians  cowpers  wrights  bonnetmakers  lait  deacones  of 
weavers  and  fleshours  and  divers  others  ther  assessors. 

Report  Fairie  The  sd  day  the  said  James  Fairie  made  report  of  his  deligence  at  Londone 

approving  ^^^  ^^^^^  j^  ^j,^^  compt  of  his  charges  and  of  the  money  he  receavit  at  his  away 
goeing  qlk  is  as  follows  q''with  the  haill  hous  was  content  and  satisfied  and 
did  all  with  ane  consent  allow  and  approve  of  the  samyne  as  also  he  produced 
severall  letters  he  had  receavit  be  King  James  the  Sext  and  be  King  Chairles 
the  First  being  in  all  thrie  qlks  war  givine  to  the  deacon  cyviner  with  ane  act 
of  counsell  in  favors  of  the  treads  with  ane  consulta'une  fallowing  y^'vpon 
to  be  keipit  be  him  q"  the  nLxt  meitting  and  the  sd  James  Fairie  was  dis- 
chargit  accordinUe. 


1670]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  441 

Fallows  the  coiiipt  givine  in  be  James   Fairie  ancni  his  charges  and 

debursmenis. 

In  the  first  he  charges  himselfe  with  the  recept  of  ane  hundreth  and  twentie  Compt  Fdrie. 
pund  sterhng  at  his  goeing  to  London  qrof  he  hes  givine  back  as  wnspent 
thrie  scoir  punds  sterhng  and  ther  is  ane  hors  qlk  was  bought  at  Londone 
for  aught  pund  sterhng  and  ane  croune  qlk  is  to  be  sold  and  qt  sail  happen 
to  be  givine  y''{oir  is  to  be  givine  back  also. 

The  same  day  all  present  haveing  hard  the  sd  James  Fairie  his  report  anent  Certane 
the  comissioune  grantit  be  them  to  him  for  his  repareing  to  Londone  to  negotiat  choysen'to 
anent  the  preserva^une  of  ther  liberties  and  friedome  they  did  find  it  verie  ^fP/^J'", 

•^  ■'  Edinburgh. 

necessar  that  some  of  then-  number  should  repair  to  Edinburgh  to  give  thanks 
to  such  noblemen  as  had  proven  ther  freinds  in  that  particular  and  to  see  q' 
may  be  done  at  the  sitting  doune  of  the  ni.xt  enscheuing  parliament  and  to 
give  informa~une  according  to  the  treuth  that  the  moneyis  spent  vpon  the 
preserva'une  of  ther  friedome  was  not  takine  out  of  ther  poores  moneys  bot 
was  propper  meanies  belonging  to  the  frie  treadsmen  w'in  this  burgh  and  that 
for  the  better  clearing  of  them  of  divers  asspersiounes  laid  vpon  them  and  for 
this  effect  they  made  choys  of  the  sd  deacon  cyviner  James  Fairie  and  John 
Hall  and  Patrike  Bryce, 

Decimo  Septentbris  1670. 

Convined  the  deacon  cyviner  with  James  Fairie  with  the 
deacones  of  tailzo''s  cordouners  coupers  weavers  wrights  chirurgians 
skinners  bonnetmakers  Jo"  Findlay  maltman  and  Patrick  Bryce 
coUecto''. 

The  sd  day  the  fornamit  persones  haveing  castin  vp  the  compt  of  the  The  extent  of 
rent  of  ther  pairt  of  the  lands  of  Gorballs  for  the  cropt  1669  years  the[y]  did  rent^for'thl 
find  the  samyne  to  be  ane  hundreth  twentie  nyne  bolls  of  beir  and  meall  att  y^^  '^^a- 
fyve  pund  per  boll  qlk  extends  to  sex  hundreth  fourtie  fyve  punds.     Item  the 
fourt  pairt  of  the  teynds  of  the  lands  of  Gorbell  the  sd  year  extends  to  ane 
hundreth  four  scoir  sex  punds  threttine  shilling  four  pennies  aff  the  qlk  sowme 
ther  was  deducit  thrie  scoir  fourtine  pund  sex  shilling  aught  pennies  qlk  was 
payit  to  the  colledge  as  a  pairt  of  the  minister  of  Govane  his  steipand  and 
swa  ther  did  remaine  to  be  comptit  for  amongst  the  treads  seavine  hundreth 
fyftie  seavine  punds  sex  shilhng  aught  pennies  qlk  sowme  being  devydit  in 
threttie  ane  pairts  ther  falls  to  be  payit  of  ah  rent  for  ilk  thowsand  merk  twentie 
four  punds  aught  shilhng  sex  pennies  and  thrie  shilhng  four  pennies  amongst 
the  haill. 

The  same  day  ordaines  the  haill  persones  abovenamit  to  meat  wpon  Meating 
{  )  nixt  w'  the  sd  Patrick  Bryce  collector  to  hear  the  compt  app°>""t''- 


442 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1670 


of  the  charges  deburst  to  the  deacon  cyv'iner  John  Hall  and  the  sd  Patrick 
Brj-ce  the  last  tyme  they  war  derect  to  Ed''  and  ordaines  the  samyne  to  be 
bookit  be  the  dark  conforme  as  the  samj'ne  sail  be  givine  in  and  concludit 
wpon. 

Decimo  tertio  Septembris  1670. 

Convined  W'"^  Wallace  deacon  cyviner  w'  the  deacones  of 
hamermen  tail2o''s  cordouners  wrights  skinners  chirurgians  John 
Findlay  maltman  and  Patrick  Bryce  ther  coUecto''. 


Compt 

Patrick 

Brvce. 


The  qlk  daj'  the  haill  persounes  above  designit  being  convined  for  taking 
notice  and  inspectioune  q'  moneyes  the  sd  Patrick  Bryce  had  receavit  from 
the  severall  treads  w'in  this  burgh  and  anent  the  preserva~une  of  ther  liberties 
and  priviledges  they  did  find  that  the  sd  Patrick  had  receaved  tvva  thousand 
ane  hundreth  threttie  thrie  pund  sex  shilhng  aught  pennies  and  haveing  againe 
considered  the  sd  Patrick  Bryce  his  compt  anent  q'  he  had  caused  anser  Baillie 
Fairie  at  Londone  and  q'  he  had  deburst  for  the  sd  deacon  cyviner  and  John 
Hall  ther  charges  q"  they  war  sent  to  Ed^  to  consult  the  counsells  act  and  q' 
he  had  deburst  for  the  sd  deacon  C5'viner  John  Hall  and  Baillie  Fairie  and  the 
sd  Patrick  his  awTie  charges  being  derect  to  Ed"'  to  attend  the  treads  bussines 
extending  in  haill  to  the  sowme  of  twa  thousand  twa  hundreth  seavintie  nyne 
pund  fourtine  shillings  and  swa  they  did  find  the  sd  Patrick  Bryce  superexpendit 
in  ane  hundreth  fourtie  sex  punds  seavine  shilhngs  four  pennies  qlk  they  heirby 
ordaine  to  be  payit  to  him  be  the  sd  Bailhe  Fairie  out  of  the  first  and  reddiest 
of  the  monejTS  he  left  vnspent  at  Londone  and  does  heirby  exoner  and  sim- 
pliciter  discharge  the  sd  Patrick  Biyce  ther  sd  collecto'"  of  his  haill  intro- 
missione  with  the  sd  sowme  of  2133  pund  vj  s.  viij  d.  qlk  he  did  receave  fra 
the  sd  severall  treads. 


Lyt  for  the 

deacon 

cyviner. 


Decimo  sccundo  Ociobris  1670. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacon  cyviner  and  deacones  of  craftis  and  ther  brethrine 
of  counsell  being  convined  for  ellecting  of  twa  of  ther  number  to  be  presented 
with  the  present  deacon  cyviner  to  the  provest  bailhes  and  counsell  of  this 
burgh  and  \'y''s  haveand  interest  to  the  effect  ane  of  them  might  be  made 
choyse  of  as  deacon  conviner  for  the  year  enshewing  be  plurahtie  of  vottis 
WilUam  Wallace  pnt  deacon  cyviner  James  Fairie  and  John  Hall  war  ellectit 
and  choysen  for  that  effect  and  ordaines  the  deacones  of  hamermen  and  tailzo''s 
to  present  the  lytt. 


Wallace 

deacon 

cyviner. 


Thairafter  the  sd  day  the  forsd  William  Wallace  was  ellectit  and  choysen 
deacon  conviner  for  the  year  enshewing. 


1670]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW, 


443 


Dccimo  Icrlio  Odohris  1670. 

Fallowcs  tilt  names  of  Ihe  pcrsones  u-ho  are  lo  be  vpon  the  deacon  cyviners 
ho  lis  for  the  year  to  come. 

Deacones 
Hendrie  Watt  Jo"  Findlay 

Jo»  Gilkreist  Alexf  Eglintoune 

James  Thomsoune  Andrew  Elphinstoune 

W""  Crawfuird  W'"  Cochrane 

Jon  Flaickfeild  W'"  Sheills 

Robert  Boyd  James  Gilmour  yo^ 

Jo"  Walker 
Androw  Ralstoune 


Hamermen 


Tailzeo''s 


Cordouners 


Baxters 


Weavers 


James  Colquhoune  baillie 


Hendrie  Watt 
James  Fairie 
Androw  Purdoune 
John  Leiper 
Alex""  Govane 
James  Ker 

Jo°  Gilcreist 
James  Blair 
Androw  Scott 
Simone  Tennent 
Jo"  Dalrymple 
\Vm  Knox 

James  Thomsoune 
John  Wood 
John  Listoune 
Jo"  Pinkertoune 
Robert  Gairner 
James  Hutchesoune 

W'm  Crawfuird 
Daniell  Purdoune 
Jo"  Scott  elder 

Jo"  Flaickfeild 
Patrick  Bryce 
Walter  Stewart 
Jo"  Clark 


Maltmen 


Chiiiirgianes 


Wrights 


Coupers 


Meassounes 


Fleshours 


John  Findlay 
Patrick  Bryce 
John  Miller 
John  Park 
Mathow  M'-'Aulay 
George  Grahame 

Androw  Elpinstoune 
Jo"  Hall 
Archibald  Bogle 

Alex""  Eghntoune 
Alex^  Danizell 
James  Elpinstoune 

W'm  Sheills 
James  Sheills 
Ro'  Findlay 

Rot  Boyd 
Jo"  Clark 
Thomas  Cauldwall 

James  Gihnour  yo^ 
W™  Gilmour 
Jo"  Berrie 


Bonnetmakers  Jo"  Walker 

Niniane  Spence 


Off'. 


444 

Skinners 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW 

Gaimers 


[1670 


W™  Cochrane 
Ro'  Bogle 
William  Go\ane 


Androw  Ralstoune 
W'n  Hutchisone 
Ro'  Tennent 


The  bretlirine 
gave  y' oat  Les. 


The  brethrine 
of  the  gild 
counseli. 


The  same  day  the  haill  persounes  abovewryttin  who  war  pnt  gave 
ther  oathes  as  vse  is. 

The  same  day  the  sd  deacon  conviner  with  the  forsd  persounes  who  war 
pnt  and  gave  ther  oathes  being  lykways  convined  for  ellecting  of  four  of  ther 
number  to  be  for  the  deane  of  gild  his  brethrine  of  counseli  of  the  craftis  rank 
be  plurahtie  of  v-ottis  thir  persones  fallowing  war  ellectit  viz  the  sds  James 
Fairie  John  Hall  Patrick  Bryce  malt  and  Simone  Tennent  and  ordained  the 
sd  deacon  cyviner  to  pnt  them  as  vse  is. 

The  same  [day]  Robert  Andersoune  was  continowed  oft"^  for  ane  year  to 
come  quha  being  pnt  acceptit  and  gave  his  oath  as  vse  is. 


Zair  and 
Andersone 
cyjunct  clerks, 


M'.-Vulay 
collector. 


Vigesimo  secundo  Novemhris  1670. 

Conveined  W'ilUam  Wallace  deacon  conveiner  with  the  deacones 
of  crafts  and  ther  bretherein  of  counseli  for  the  most  pairt. 

The  said  day  W'"  Zair  and  George  Andersone  ar  elected  and  choysen 
conjunct  clerks  to  the  crafts  house  and  the  sd  George  being  present  gave  his 
oath  of  fidelitie  as  also  it  wes  aggried  and  concluded  that  the  clerks  fiall  in 
tyme  comeing  sail  be  fourtie  merks  yearhe  qch  is  to  be  divyded  equallie 
betui.xt  them. 

The  qlk  day  Mathow  M'^Aulay  maltman  wes  choysen  collector  to  the  house 
for  ane  year  to  come  who  being  present  did  accept  and  give  his  oath  as  vse  is. 

The  same  day  Patrick  Bryce  last  collector  made  his  compt  of  his  intro- 
missioune  with  the  rent  belonging  to  the  crafts  house  qrof  charge  and  discharge 
is  as  foUowes  viz 

Charge. 

In  the  first  he  charges  himselfe  with  q'  remained  in  his  hands  at 

his  last  compt  making  extending  to  .  .  .       32     7     3 

Item  receaved  fra  Robert  Campbell  as  the  house  pairt  of  the 

bucket  money  receaved  be  him  the  last  3ear  .  .     159    6    6 

Item  with  the  hospitall  pairt  of  the  Gorball  rent  the  sd  year 

extending   to  .....  .     195     8     o 

Item  with  qt  he  receaved  out  of  Ro'  Caruthers  land  fra  (  ) 

Allansoune  13  "h  gs.  fra  \<^  Scot  4  ll  fra  W™  Stampert 
travellour  15  i  extending  to  .  .  .  .       32    9    o 


52 

0 

0 

35 

15 

4 

6o 

0 

0 

40 

0 

0 

87 

0 

0 

66 

13 

0 

50 

0 

0 

30 

0 

0 

1670]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  445 

Item  with  q'  he  receaved  out  of  James  Duncanes  land  from  James 

Bowie  22  1X  from  W™  Leckie  30  ll  extending  to 
Item  receaved  of  poores  money  fra  the  dean  of  gilds  house 
Item  receaved  fra  M"'  Charles  Mowat  resting  of  his  gildrie  fyne 
Item  fra  Tho.  Miller  wright  as  a  p*  of  his  gildrie  fyne 
Item  fra  Johne  Reid  of  gildrie  fyne       .... 
Item  fra  Johne  Findlay  weiver  in  pairt  pay'  of  his  gildrie  fjme 
Item  from  Patrick  and  Alex''  Wilsones  gairdners  of  ther  gildrie  iynes 
Item  fra  James  Crafourd  in  pairt  pay'  of  his  gildrie  fyne 
Item  fra  fyve  new  deacones  the  last  year  c,onforme  to  vse  and  wont 

viz  deacone  of  hamermen  tailzeors  skiners  cowpers  gairdners 

at  8 1i  per  peice    inde         .  .  .  .  .       40    o    o 

Item  fra  the  haill  deacones  in  name  of  quarter  compts  for  suppUe 

of  the  poor  in  the  house       .....     206     6     8 
Item  receaved  fra  Johne  Sheills  in  Gorballs  for  the  arent  of  350 

merks  fra  Witsonday  1668  to  Witsonday  1669         .  .       14     o     0 

Item  receaved  fra  David  Miller  for  ane  years  arent  of  500  merks 

fra  Mertimes  1668  to  Mertimes  i66g  .  .  .       20    0    o 

Item  fra  Thomas  Shearer  wryter  for  the  arent  of  three  hundreth 

merks  the  sd  year  .  .  .  .  .       12    o    o 

Item  fra  Alexander  Govane  for  the  arent  of  100  merks  the  sd  year        400 
Item  fra  the  Laird  of  Hardgray  for  the  arent  of  300  merks  the  sd 

year  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       12    o    o 

Item  fra  Johne  Neisbit  and  James  Mann  for  the  arent  of  300  merks 

the  sd  year  .  .  .  .  .  .       12    o    o 

Item  fra  Johne  Neisbit  for  ane  years  arent  of  500  merks  from 

Witsonday   1669   to  Witsonday   1670  .  .  .       20     o     o 

Item  fra  W'"  Andersone  proveist  for  twa  years  arent  of  500  merks 

fra  Witsonday  1668  to  Witsonday  1670       .  .  .       40     0     o 

Item  fra  the  Laird  of  Netherpollock  for  ane  years  arent  of  1000 

merks  fra  \\'itsonday  1669  to  Witsonday  1670  .  .       40     o     o 

Item  fra  Andrew  Morsoune  for  ane  years  arent  of  400  merks  fra 

Witsonday  1669  to  Witsonday  1670  .  .  .       16     o     o 

Item  fra  James  Ker  late  baillie  for  ane  years  arent  of  800  ll  fra 

Mertimes  1668  to  Mertimes  1669      .  .  .  .       48     o    o 

Sufha  of  the  charge  is  .  .  .       {  ) 

Discharge. 

In  the  first  de burst  to  the  sex  men  in  the  house  at  48  li  in  the  year 

to  each  of  y™  is       .              .              .              .             .              .  288     o     o 

Item  for  elevine  monethes  coales  at  xxx  s.  per  moneth  is            .  16  10    o 

Item  for  the  se.x  mens  shoes  at  30s.  per  peice  is    .              .              .  900 

Item  for  ther  sarkes  7  ells  to  each  of  y™  at  7s.  6d.  the  elne  is     .  15  15    o 


20 

4 

8 

21 

i8 

0 

25 

II 

8 

8 

8 

0 

17 

6 

6 

20 

0 

0 

20 

0 

0 

446  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW        [1670 

Item  for  8  elnes  of  cloath  to  be  cloak  and  cloathes  to  Gilbert  Hall 

at  40s.  the  elne  is  16  ll  and  for  making  and  furnishing  to  y™ 

4  li  4s.  6d.  is  in  haill  ..... 

Item  for  cloathes  to  Davud  Gray  and  Johne  Currie  and  for  furnishing 
Item  to  James  Clerk  and  Andrew  Jap  for  cloathes  and  furnishing 

to  y""  conforme  to  the  compt  .... 

Item  for  making  them      ...... 

Item  for  cloak  and  hosse  and  making  y™  to  the  officer    . 

Item  to  the  clerk  for  his  fiall      ..... 

Item  to  the  officer  for  his  fiall      ..... 

Item  deburst   to  severall  poore  psones  at   Hallo\\Tnes  court  be 

warrand  vnder  the  clerks  hand       ....     107  19     4 
Item  to  Ja.  Andersone  for  the  house  p*  of  the  few  dewtie  and 

taxa^ne  for  the  cropt  1668  .  .  .  .       21    6    8 

Item  deburst  to  Johne  Ronald  tailzeor  and  Katherine  Andersone 

by  comand  of  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones  when  John 

Currie  wes  pute  in  the  house  againe  .  .  .600 

Item  for  ane  new  glase  in  the  bak  window  of  the  hospitall  being 

18  foote  at  3s.  the  foote  by  and  attour  the  old  glese  is  .         2  14    o 

Item  for  ane  other  glase  and  mending  of  the  rest  of  the  glase  windowes       148 
Item  given  to  buy  ane  winding  sheit  to  Jo"  Vrrie  .  .         280 

Item  given  to  ane  distrest  gentleman  at  comand  of  the  cyveiner        2  18    o 
Item  given  to  Ro^  Andersone  for  goeing  to  Pollock  and  severall 

other  earands  .  .  .  .  .  .         o  12     o 

Item  to  W"  Hall  at  comand  of  the  deacon  cj'veiner     .  .         i  10    o 

Item  to  Ro'  Boak  and  Johne  Broune  weivers  and  Robert  Hodzairds 

wyfe  conforme  to  ane  warrand       .  .  .  .       16     o     o 

Item  for  ane  pair  of  drogate  breitches  and  making  of  them  for 

George  Pollock  .  .  .  .  .  .         i  17     o 

Item  to  v/  Gabriell  Cunynghames  relict  q"  she  wes  vpon  her  death 

bed  qch  she  vsed  formerlie  to  get     .  .  .  .         8  10     o 

Item  to  ane  poore  womane  Mareoun  Hall  be  ordour  from  the 

deacon  cyveiner        .  .  .  .  .  .         2  18    o 

Item   to  ane   poore  criple  having  ane  recomendatioime  fra   the 

deacon  cyveiner  of  Ed''  be  ordour     .  .  .  .         2  18    o 

Item  to  Margaret  Wilsone  rehct  of  v/  Robert  Glen  baxter  by 

ordour  fra  the  deacon  cyveiner         .  .  .  .140 

Item  to  ane  poore  north  cuntreyman  with  5  childrein       .  .         i  10    o 

Item  to  Jeane  Love  at  the  sd  comand  of  the  deacon  cyveiner     .         300 
Item  to  Ro'  Andersone  to  buy  ane  paire  of  shoes  by  ordour  of  the 

deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones  .  .  .  .100 

Item  to  the  factor  of  the  colledge  for  Howiesones  burssar  conforme 

to  the  discharge        .  .  ,  .  .  ,       66  13     4 


4    9 
i6  13 

8 
4 

I    4 

0 

.     400    0 
•     ( 

0 

) 

1670]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  447 

Item  deburst  for  repairing  of  James  Duncanes  land  viz  for  ane 

lock  ane  kie  and  mending  ane  band  of  ane  doore  17s.  4d.  for 

ane  100  riging  to  the  brew-house  13s.  4d.  for  ane  draught  clay 

6s.  for  6  threive  oat  strawe  at  i6s.  the  threive  in  shaves  4  li 

i6s.  for  ane  workman  and  on  to  serve  him  and  for  laying  ane 

troch  stone  3  tl  7s.  4d.     Item  for  the  troch  stone  and  carieing 

yi'of  is  in  all  .  .  .  .  .  .       17    4    o 

Item  for  lyme  and  sand  sclaits  and  daills  with  the  workmanship 

and  others  in  repairing  and  mending  the  hospitall  conforme 

to   the   compt  .  .  .  .  .  .       20  18    o 

Item  for  mending  the  lume  heid  nixt  to  the  hospitall  for  13  kebers 

and  for  clay  and  divots  and  stroe  and  other  necessars  with 

the  workmanship  .... 

Item  for  gathering  in  the  Gorball  rent  to  the  collector     . 
Item  for  se.xtein  cleikes  for  hinging  of  buckets  and  for  naills 
Item  lent  wpon  band  to  Johne  Corse  wright  and  his  cautioner 
Suiiia  of  the  discharge  is     . 

Sua  charge  and  discharge  being  compared  ther  rests  in  the 
compters  hand  ane  hundreth  four  score  sex  pounds  sevine  shilling 
two  pennies  scots  qch  he  is  appoynted  to  pay  in  to  Mathow  M'^Aulay 
present  collector  with  qch  he  is  to  be  charged  and  the  sd  Patrik  is 
heirby  discharged  of  his  haill  intromissioune  he  pa3dng  the  samen. 

The  said  day  the  sd  Patrick  Bryce  produced  threttie  two  pounds  eightein 
shilling  scots  receaved  be  him  of  burgess  silver  the  last  year  qch  wes  imediatlie 
delyvered  to  the  present  collector  qrwith  he  is  also  to  be  charged  at  his  compt 
making. 

Item  the  sd  Patrick  Bryce  produced  ane  band  of  400  ti  granted  be  Johne  Band  of  400 
Corse  and  his  cau^  to  the  house  payable  at  the  terme  of  Mertimes  nixt  \\ith  ane  ,'ijg  ^"^^_  "^ 
years  arent  qch  wes  presentlie  pute  in  the  box. 

The  said  day  ther  was  delyvered  to  the  present  collector  the  bands  following  Bands  given 
qrwith  he  is  to  be  charged  at  his  compt  making.  Imprimis  ane  band  granted  ^°,\^% 
be  James  Crafourd  qrby  he  is  resting  sextie  pounds  of  ane  greater  soume 
Item  ane  band  granted  be  Patrik  and  Alexander  Wilsones  gairdners  of  fyftie 
pounds  Item  ane  band  be  Patrik  Stevine  gairdner  of  ane  hundreth  merks 
Item  Johne  Findlay  weiver  his  band  of  fyftie  merks  Item  ane  band  be  Ro' 
Dickie  and  his  cau"'  of  threscore  pounds  scots  Item  ane  decreit  against  Elspeth 
Morisoune  of  sextie  pounds  scots. 

The  same  day  it  is  appoynted  and  agried  wpon  be  the  haill  fomamed  Mowatsband 
persones  that  M^  Charles  Mowat  his  band  of  sixtie  pounds  scots  resting  of  ^roydst  "^^ 
his  gildrie  fyne  be  delyvered  to  the  proveist  to  the  effect  if  he  please  y'  he  may 


448 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1670 


Maxwell 
bursar. 


Auditors 
Bryce  compt. 


Cloathes 
officer. 


delyver  the  samen  to  the  sd  M""  Charles  to  be  cancelled  and  in  y'  caice  they 
heirby  discharge  the  sd  M"'  Charles  of  the  samen. 

Vigesimo  qiiinto  Novembris  1670. 

The  qlk  day  being  conveined  in  Hutchesones  hospitall  W™  Wallace  deacon 
cyveiner  with  the  deacones  of  crafts  and  severall  of  the  deacon  cyveiners 
connsell  they  ordane  ane  presentatione  to  be  granted  to  David  Maxwell  sone 
to  Jo°  Maxwell  maltman  to  ane  bursars  place  of  philosophic  in  the  CoUedge 
of  Glasgow  at  the  house  presenta~une  qch  wes  last  possest  be  Patrick  Bryce 
sone  to  Patrick  Bryce  weiver  and  y*  in  respect  he  hes  deserted  the  samen. 

The  sd  day  appo^Tits  the  deacon  cyveiner  deacon  of  hamermen  taileours 
cordoner  with  the  collector  and  q™  others  they  please  to  clear  compts  with 
James  Br\xe  anent  his  intromissioune  with  the  small  few  dewties  belonging  to 
the  house  and  to  pay  him  for  his  paines. 

The  same  day  appoynts  the  collector  to  buy  to  Ro'  Andersone  officer  ane 
sute  of  close  and  q'  he  payes  therfore  sail  be  allowed  in  the  first  end  of  his 
compt. 

Notio  Febriiarij  1671. 

Conveined  W"  \\'allace  deacon  C3^einer  with  James  Farie  late 
baillie  Patrick  Bryce  deacones  of  hamermen  taileours  cordouners 
baxters  skinners  maissounes  weivers  cowpers  fleshours  Johne  Findlay 
maltman  with  severall  of  ther  bretherein  of  counsell. 


Deacon  The  said  day  grants  power  and  comissioune  to  the  deacon  cyveiner  to 

subscrvve°ane   subscryve  ane  tak  to  David  Armour  his  wyfe  and  sone  of  ten  raids  of  land 
tak.  or  therby  in  Mure  of  Gorballs  for  the  space  of  nyntein  years. 


The  same  day  appoynts  the  deacon  cyveiner  James  Farie  Johne  Hall  and 
nroveist  anei  t  Patrick  Brvce  and  q™  others  they  please  to  meit  with  the  proveist  and  setle 
the  excyse.       with  him  anent  q'  longer  tyme  they  please  to  grant  of  the  excyse  to  the  toun. 


Persones  to 
meit  w*  the 


Prenteis 
Bovd. 


The  sd  day  Johne  Boyd  sone  to  vmq"  W">  Boyd  maissoune  is  booked  as 
he  who  wes  bound  prenteise  with  W"  Boyd  maissoune  for  the  space  of  seavine 
years  as  prenteise  and  two  for  meit  and  lie  conforme  to  the  indentor  dated 
the  first  day  of  December  1666. 


Prenteiss 
Inglis 


Dccinw  septiino  Martij  1671. 

The  qlk  day  W"  IngUs  sone  to  James  Inghs  mefd  is  booked  prenteis  with 
Johne  Pollock  cowper  for  the  space  of  seavine  year  as  prenteis  and  two  for 
meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  26  of  Julij  1669. 


1671]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  449 

The  samen  day  Johne  Craig  is  booked  as  he  who  wes  bound  prenteise  and  Craig. 
with  Johne  Dunkisoune  coppersmith  for  5  years  and  two  for  meit  and  fie 
conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  nynt  day  of  December  1667  years. 

20  of  March  1671. 
The  sd  day  James  Davidsone  sone  to  James  Davidsone  officer  is  booked  Prenteis 
prenteise  with  Johne  Andersone  hamerman  for  the  space  of  fyve  year  as  prenteis     ^^''  ^°"'''' 
and  two  for  meit  and   lie  conforme   to  the  indentor  dated  the  tvventie  sevint 
of  Januarij  1671. 

The  said  day  Johne  Dobie  sone  to  vmq"  Jo°  Dobie  in  Rusholoch  is  booked  Prenteis 
prenteis  with  David  Leishman  hamerman  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat  and  '-'°'"^- 
fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  last  day  of  November  1668. 

The  same  day  \V">  Barr  is  booked    prenteis  with    Alexander    Govane  Prenteis  Barr 
hamerman  for  fyve  years  as  prenteis  and  two  years  for  meat  and  fie  conforme 
to  the  indentour  past  betwixt  y™  theranent. 


The  same  day  William  Noble  sone  to  vmq"  Androw  Noble  mefd  is  booked  Prenteis 
teis  with  Ro^  Dickie  wright  for  sevine  years  an( 
fie  indentour  dated  the  tvventie  ane  of  Apryle  1669. 


prenteis  with  Ro^  Dickie  wright  for  sevine  years  and  two  years  for  meit  and     °   '^ 


The  sd  day  W™  Rob  sone  to  David  Rob  maltman  is  booked  prenteis  with  Prenteis  Rob. 
Ro'  Bartoun  wright    for    7    years  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  19 
December  1668. 

Vigesimo  primo  Marlij  1671. 

The  said  day  Robert  Wood  is  booked  prenteis  with  Gavine  Wood  wright  Prenteis 
for  the  space  of  sea  vine  years  and  two  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  "°°"' 
dated  the  twelfe  day  of  Feb^'J  1668. 

The  sd  day  James  Grahame  sone  lau"  to  vmq"  Johne  Grahame  in  Balqu-  Grahame 
hauran  is  booked  prenteis  w'  W™  Grahame  peutherer  for  seavine  years  as  p''^"'*^'^- 
prenteis  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  30  of  December  1670. 

The  same  day  George  Buntein  sone  lau"  to  vmq"  George  Buntein  late  Prenteis 
clerk  of  Dumbartan  is  booked  prenteis  with  Ro'  Alex""  hamerman  for  the  space  B""'<^'"- 
of  fyve  years  and  two  for  meit  and  fie  indentor  dated  15  Sepf  1668. 

The  said  day  George  Shankes  sone  to  James  Shankes  sailler  is  booked  Prenteis 
prenteis  with  George  Weinzet  wright  for  seavine  years  conforme  to  the  indentour  ^^^"'^^* 
dated  the  last  of  Januarij  1671. 

The  said  day  Wilham  Bogle  sone  lau"  to  Johne  Bogle  portioner  of  Boghs-  Prenteiss 
hoU  is  booked  prenteis  with  Johne  Mershell  feltmaker  for  seavine  years  con-  ^°8'^- 
forme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  last  of  October  1666. 

2E 


450 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1671 


Prenteis 
Williamsone. 


Prenteis 
Miller. 


The  sd  [day]  Thomas  Bogle  sone  lau"  to  the  sd  Johne  Bogle  is  booked 
prenteis  \v'  Johne  Hunter  maissoune  for  the  space  of  seavine  years  conforme 
to  the  indentour  dated  the  twentie  sext  day  of  November  1670. 

The  sd  day  .^dame  ^^'ilUamsone  sone  lau"  to  James  Wilhamsone  in 
Riddinglaw  is  bund  prenteis  w'  the  sd  Jo"  ^lershell  feltmaker  for  the  space  of 
seavine  years  as  prenteis  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  13  December  1667. 

The  said  da\'  James  MiUer  sone  to  Alex"'  Miller  in  Blackwoodhill  is  booked 

prenteis  with  .\lexander  Strang  coppersmith  for  fyve  years  and  two  years  for 
meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  twentie  eight  day  of  November 
1667. 

Vigesinio  tertio  Martij  1671. 

Ventir  dailies.  The  Said  day  William  Wallace  deacon  cyveiner  James  Colhoun,  baiUie, 

James  Farie  Johne  Hall  with  the  haill  deacones  of  crafts  e.xcept  the  deacones 
of  maissounes  and  fleshours  being  conveined  anent  ane  ship  of  ventir  daills 
lying  at  Greinock  made  offer  of  to  the  toun  be  Dirrick  Petersone  at  fyftein  leg 
dollors  the  hundreth  with  three  to  ilk  hundreth  and  the  bujxrs  to  receave  y™ 
at  the  ship  syd  and  to  pay  the  custome  and  all  other  dewtie  lyable  therfore 
and  he  to  be  frie  yrof  and  q*  daiUs  is  not  sufficient  he  is  to  tak  y"i  bak  efter 
consideratione  therof  thej'  appoynt  Baillie  Colquhoun  (who  is  on  of  y'^  appoynted 
be  the  toun)  to  goe  doune  and  sight  the  samen  and  to  accept  the  craftis  pairt 
at  the  pryce  offerred  if  he  think  y™  worth  so  mutch  if  not  to  mak  any  bargane 
he  can  at  the  easiest  rate  and  qt  he  sail  doe  yranent  they  obleage  y""  to  abyd 
5Tat. 


Prenteiss 
Uunlop 


and  Baird. 


The  said  da}-  Robert  Dunlop  sone  to  W™  Dunlop  in  Donkathall  is  booked 
prenteis  w''  James  Dunlop  hamerman  lor  fyve  years  and  two  for  meit  and  fie 
conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  eight  day  of  Feb'''-!  1671.  ' 

The  sd  day  Johne  Baird  sone  to  Androw  Baird  in  Wheitmylne  is  booked 
prenteis  with  W™  Crafourd  baxter  for  5  j-ear  and  2  year  for  meit  and  fie  con- 
forme to  the  indentor  made  theranent. 


Prenteis  Hill. 


Prenteis 
.\llan. 


Vigesimo  septimo  Martij  167 1. 

The  said  day  Androw  Hill  sone  lau"  to  v/  Johne  Hill  portioner  in  east  end 
of  Meikle  Govane  is  booked  prenteis  with  Robert  Young  cowper  for  the  space 
of  sevine  years  conforme  to  the  indentor  dated  the  ellevint  of  Junij  1668. 

The  said  day  George  Allan  is  booked  prenteis  with  Daniell  Purdoun  baxter 
for  the  space  of  fyve  years  as  prenteise  and  two  year  for  meat  and  fie  conforme 
to  the  indentour  dated  the  twentie  fourt  day  of  October  1667. 


1671]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  451 

The  sd  day  W"'  Lylburne  sone  to  Thomas  Lylburne  meilman  is  booked  Prenteis 
prenteis  with  James  Crafourd  baxter  (or  the  space  of  fyve  years  as  prenteis     ^   "™^' 
and  two  for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  sext  of  Feb'^'J 
1669. 

The  same  day  Robert  Tennent  sone  lau"  to  Ro*  Tennent  malt,  is  booked  prenteis 
prenteis  with  Johne  Scot  baxter  for  fyve  years  as  prenteis  and  two  years  for  tennent. 
meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  twentie  eight  of  May  1667. 

The  same  day  George  Barr  is  booked  prenteis  with  James  Morisoune  Prenteis  Barr. 
baxter  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  indentour  dated  the  (  ) 

day  of  {  )  1670  years. 

Vtgesimo  octavo  Martij  1671. 

The  said  day  Johne  Stevinsone  sone  to  Androw  Stevinsone  meilman  is  Prenteis 
booked  prenteis  with  Robert  Heriot  baxter  for  fyve  year  and  two  year  for  meit 
and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  eightein  of  Feb'''J  1669. 

Tertio  Aprilis  1671. 

The  sd  day  Archbald  Clark  sone  lau"  to  Daniell  Clark  in  Geilstoun  is  Prenteis 
booked  prenteis  with  Mathow  M^Aulay  maltman  for  fyve  years  conforme  to      ^"^ 
the  indentour  dated  the  seventine  day  of  Junij  1666. 

The  said  day  Robert  Stewart  sone  lau"  to  Allan  Stewart  in  Eastwood  is  Prenteis 
booked  prenteis  with  Johne  Cumyng  maltman  for  the  space  of  fyve  years  ^''^"''i'''- 
conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  tent  of  Feb'''J  i66o- 


The  said  day  Johne  Boyd  sone  to  Alex''  Boyd  in  Boigsyd  of  Glentore  is  Prenteis 
booked  prenteis  with  Alexander  French  maltman  for  the  space  of  fyve  years     °^  ' 
conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  last  of  Junij  1670. 


Decimo  Aprilis  1671. 

The  sd  day  Johne  M<^Kie  sone  lau"  to  Robert  M'^Kie  in  Elphingstoun  is  prenteis 
booked  prenteis  with  Johne  Scot  yo''  baxter  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meit  ^'"^'^''^• 
and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  se\'intein  of  March  1666. 

The  said   day  Thomas    Scot  sone   lau"  to  vmq"   Johne  Scot  in  North  Prenteis  Scot. 
VVoodsyd  is  booked  as  prenteis  with  Thomas  Scot  baxter  for  fyve  year  and 
two  year  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  ellevint  day  of 
March  1669. 

Decimo  tertio  Aprilis  1671. 
The  sd  day  James  Gray  is  booked  prenteis  w*  Ro'  Flaickfeild  vveiver  for  Prenteis  Gray. 
the  space  of  fyve  years  as  prenteis  and  two  year  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to 
the  indentour  dated  the  twelfe  day  of  Feb'''J  1668 


452 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1671 


Prenteis 
Kelso. 


Prenteis 
Rehnic. 


Prenteis 
Crafourd. 


Prenteis  Tod. 


Prenteis 
Colquhoun. 


Prenteis 
Pittcairne. 


The  sd  day  Mathow  Kelso  is  booked  prenteis  w'  ]\Iatho\v  Lindsay  weiver 
for  sex  years  and  ane  year  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated 
the  penult  of  November  1667. 

The  said  day  Johne  Rehnie  is  booked  prenteis  with  James  Findlay  weiver 
for  iyve  years  as  prenteis  and  two  years  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the 
indentour  dated  the  eight  day  of  October  1668  years. 

The  sd  day  Johne  Crafourd  sone  to  Jo""  Crafourd  quariour  is  booked 
prenteis  w'  Jo"  Patersone  yo""  weiver  for  fyve  year  and  two  for  meit  and  fie 
conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  threttine  day  of  Apryle  166S. 

Decimo  quarto  Aprilis  1671. 
The  sd  daj'  James  Tod  sone  to  Androw  Tod  quariour  is  booked  prenteis 
with  Patrick  Lang  yo''  weiver  for  fyve  years  as  prenteis  and  two  years  for  meit 
and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  23  Jan'''J  1667. 

The  sd  day  James  Colquhoun  sone  naturall  to  Alex^  Colquhoun  is  booked 
prenteis  with  Johne  Findlay  yo^  weiver  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat  and 
fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  second  day  of  Jan'''''  1667  years. 

The  sd  day  Thomas  Pittcairne  sone  to  vmq"  James  Pittcairne  in  Barany 
is  booked  prenteis  w'  Johne  Mure  weiver  for  se.x  years  and  two  for  meit  and 
fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  twentie  fourt  of  No''  1666. 


Prenteis 
M'Gilchreist. 


Second  offer 
of  the  ventir 
daillis. 


Prenteis 
Patrick. 


The  same  day  Johne  M^^Gilchreist  is  booked  prenteis  with  Johne  Ritchie 
weiver  for  fyve  years  as  prenteis  and  twa  year  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to 
the  indentour  dated  the  twenty  sext  day  of  Apryle  1669. 

Decimo  scptinw  Aprilis  1671. 
The  said  day  William  W'allace  deacon  cyveiner  Patrick  Bryce  with  the 
deacones  of  hamermen  tailzeors  cordouners  wrights  weivers  chirurgens  cowpers 
gardners  maissones  baxters  bonetmakers  with  severall  others  of  ther  counsel! 
being  conveined  anent  ane  second  offeir  made  to  the  toun  of  the  ship  of  ventir 
daills  at  fourtein  leg  dollors  the  liundreth  with  thrie  to  the  hundreth  and  to 
receave  y'"  at  the  ship  syd  and  to  pay  all  dewes  therfor  conforme  to  the  first 
offeir  they  ha\e  comissonat  and  heirby  comissionats  and  appoynts  Alexander 
Egleintoun  and  Johne  Wood  to  repair  doune  to  Greinock  and  to  sight  the 
daills  and  tak  either  the  quarter  or  the  halfe  of  the  ship  loadneing  for  the  vse 
of  the  treds  as  they  sail  think  best  convenient  and  y^  in  respect  Glasgow  and 
Dumbartane  hes  refuised  to  accept  y™  at  the  pr\-ce  offerred. 

Glasgow  24  of  Apryle  1671. 
The  sd  da\'  Johne  Patrick  is  booked  prenteis  with  Thomas  Dobie  maltman 
for  fyve  years  as  prenteis  and  two  year  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour 
dated  the  seavinteen  day  of  Maij  1671  years. 


1671]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  453 

The  said  day  Johne  Paull  sone  to  vmq"  James  Paull  is  booked  pienteis  rrenteis 
with  Robert  Guiding  maltman  for  fyve  j'car  as  prenteis  and  two  year  for  meit 
and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  past  betuixt  y'"  thcranent  dated  the  nynt 
and  sextein  day  of  Junij  1669. 

The  said  day  the  deacon  conveiner  and  remanent  deacones  of  crafts  for  Ventir  daiUs 
the  most  pairt  being  conveined  with  severall  members  of  ther  counsell  Alex'' 
Egleintoun  and  Johne  Wood  who  wer  appoynted  to  sight  the  ventir  dailhs 
made  report  and  be  plurahtie  of  vots  it  is  concluded  and  aggreid  wpon  that 
they  sail  accept  of  the  haill  ships  loadneing  of  dailhs  at  the  pryce  offered  for 
the  behove  of  the  haill  treds. 

Qiiinto  Mat]  1671. 

The  said  day  Johne  Johnestoun  sone  to  William  Johnstoun  in  Bredanhill  rrenteis 
is  booked  prenteis  with  Mathow  Lindsay  weiver  for  fyve  years  and  two  for 
meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  twentie  ane  day  of  Feb'^'J 
jajvjc  (  )  years. 

16  May  1 67 1. 

The  sd  day  George  Campbell  sone  to  George  Campbell  wright  in  Calsay-  Prenteis 
heid  at  Loundoun  is  booked  prenteis  with  James  Ingraham  yo^"  cowper  for    ^™'' 
sevine  year  and  two  year  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the 
threttine  and  twentie  sevint  dayes  of  March  1609. 

30  Mai]  1 67 1. 

The  sd  day  James  Waterstoun  is  booked  prenteis  w'l  Harie  Watt  hamerman  Prenteis 
for  fyve  years  as  prenteis  and  two  year  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour      ^'erstoun. 
dated  the  28  of  Apryle  1664. 

Qninto  J ii>dj  1671. 

The  said  day  Johne  Grahame  is  booked  prenteis  w'  Alexander  Egleintoun  Prenteis 
wright  for  sevine  years  and  tv\o  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  '^'^^'"'i™^- 
dated  the  ellevint  day  of  November  1670. 

The  same  day  Johne  Riddell  sone  to  Johne  Riddell  in  Cowcadens  is  Prenteis 
booked  prenteis  w'  Harie  Watt  hamerman  for  fy\-e  years  and  two  for  meit  '  ^  ' 
and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  twentie  nynt  day  of  May  1668. 

Alt  Glasgow  decimo  quarto  Julij  1671. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones  of  crafts  w  ith  ther  brethrein  Discharge 
of  counsell  for  the  most  pairt  being  conveined  and  taking  to  ther  considera-  ^*"^- 
tione  that  James  Farie  who  wes  sent  coniissioner  to  Londoun  in  anno  1670 
be  them  for  defending  of  the  crafts  hberties  having  before  this  tj^me  made 


454  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1671 

compt  and  reckoning  of  q'  money  he  had  receaved  wpon  the  accompt  forsd 
and  for  defraying  of  his  charges  and  how  he  bestowed  and  deburst  the  samen 
and  q'  wes  remaining  in  his  hands  vnspent  of  q'  he  receaved  with  ane  horse 
qch  he  bought  at  London  to  ryd  home  wpon,  qch  was  appoynted  to  be  sold 
at  the  best  availl  and  the  pryce  therof  with  q'  remained  in  his  hands  as  sd  is 
to  be  given  bak  which  accordingUe  he  hes  done  and  that  reasoune  requyres 
that  the  sd  James  be  discharged  therof  therfore  tlie  sd  deacon  cyveiner  and 
deacones  with  ther  bretherein  of  counsell  forsd  w  Iro  wer  present  all  vnanimuslie 
with  on  consent  exoners  quyte  clame  and  simphciter  discharge  the  sd  James 
Farie  and  all  others  q™  it  effeirs  of  his  intromissioune  w*  the  craftis  money  to 
the  effect  forsd  and  of  the  haill  premiss  for  now  and  ever  and  obleiss  them 
and  ther  successors  in  office  to  warrand  the  samen  to  be  sufficient  for  his 
exoneratione  at  all  hands.  And  farder  they  ratiffie  and  approve  of  all 
q'somever  acts  facts  and  deids  y'  wes  done  be  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones 
and  the  counsell  the  last  year  in  defending  of  ther  hberties. 

Vigesimo  secttndo  Augustj  1671. 

Conveined  the  deacon  cy\'einer  Patrick  Bryce  with  the  deacon  of 
tailzeors  wrights  chirurgians  skiners  weivers  baxters  fleshours  with 
se\"erall  of  ther  brethrein  of  counsell  and  Mathow  M''Aula  ther 
collector. 

The  extent  of  The  said  day  the  fornamed  persones  ha\ing  casten  wp  the  rent  of  ther 

rent  the  year     pairt  of  the  lands  of  Gorballs  for  the  cropt  1670  they  did  find  the  samen  to 
^^''°"  be  ane  hundreth  and    twentie  nyne  bolls  bear  and  meill  at  eight  merk  ten 

shilhng  the  boll  qlk  extends  to  sevine  hundreth  fyftie  fyve  pound  three  shilUng 
four  pennies  scots  money  Item  the  fourt  pairt  of  the  teynds  of  the  said  lands 
of  Gorballs  the  sd  year  ane  hundreth  f3-ftein  pound  sextein  shilling  and  eight 
pennies  by  and  attour  threscore  fourtein  pound  sex  shilling  eight  pennies 
deburst  out  of  the  first  end  of  the  sds  tejTids  to  the  colledge  collectors  as  a 
pairt  of  the  minister  of  Govanes  stipend  and  sua  ther  is  to  be  compted  for 
among  the  crafts  the  soume  of  eight  hundreth  fyftie  four  pound  sex  shilhng 
eight  pennies  qlk  being  divydit  in  threttie  ane  pairts  ther  falls  to  be  payed  for 
ilk  thousand  merks  the  collectors  fiall  being  deduced  twentie  seavine  pound 
elle\-ine  shilhng  scots  qlk  the  collector  is  appointed  to  pay  to  the  reptive 
treds  wpon  ther  discharges  conforme  to  ther  proportiounes. 

Alt  Glasgow  the  ellevint  day  of  October  ibji. 

Lyts deacon  The  qlk  day  W™  \\'allace  present  bailhe  and  last  deacon  cyveiner  w ith  the 

cyveiner.  deacones  of  crafts  and  ther  bretherein  of  counsell  being  conveined  for  ellecting 

three  of  ther  number  to  be  presented  to  the  proveist  baillies  and  counsell  of 

this  burgh  and  others  concerned  to  the  effect  ane  of  them  may  be  made  choyse 

of  as  deacon  cyveiner  therof  for  ane  year  to  come  be  plurahtie  of  vots  the 


1671]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


455 


persones  following  wer  electit  to  the  effect  forsd  viz  James  Farie  Johne  Hall 
and  Patrick  Bryce  maltman  and  ordaines  the  deacones  of  tailzeors  and  maissones 
to  present  the  lyte. 

Therefter  the  said  daj*  the  abovenamed  James  Farie  was  choysen  deacon  Fary  deacon 
cyveiner  for  ane  year  to  come.  cyvener. 

Duodecimo  Octobris  1671. 
Followes  the  names  of  the  persones  who  ay  choysen  to  be  lapon  the 
deacon    cyvciners    house    for    ane    year    to    come    and   first    the 
deacones  viz 

Patrick  Bryce 
Johne  Otterbume 
Ard  Bogle 
W™  Cochrane 
James  Sheills 
Johne  Barrie 
Niniane  Spence 
Wm  Hutchesone 


Alexander  Govane 
Robert  Thomsone 
Johne  Listoun 
Daniell  Purdoun 
Walter  Stewart 
Johne  Clark 


Hamermen 


Win  VVallace  baillie 

Henrie  Watt  Maltmen 

W'»  Philp 
Androw  Purdoun 
Patrick  M<^Ilvicar 
WilUam  Grahame 


Tailzeors 


Cordouners 


Baxters 


Weivers 


Johne  Gilchreist 
Simeon  Tennent 
Androw  Scot 
James  Blair 
Johne  Dalrymple 

James  Thomsone 
Johne  Wood 
Johne  Pinkertoun 
Johne  Wodrop 
David  \\'eir 

W"  Crafourd 
Johne  Scot 

Johne  Flaikfeild 
Patrick  Bryce 
Johne  Clark 


Chirurgians 


Skiners 


Cowpers 


Wrights 


Fleshours 


Johne  Findlay 
Johne  Miller 
Johne  Park 
Mathow  M^Aulay 
Johne  Robiesone 

Johne  Hall 

Androw  Elphingstoun 

William  Govane 
Robert  Bogle. 

W»'  Sheills 
James  Smith 


James  Colquhoun 
Alex'  Egleintoun 

James  Gilmour 
James  Watsone 


Bonetmakers    Johne  Walker 


456 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [167I 


Gairdners 


Maissones 


Counselloiirs 
swome  and 
absents. 


Clerks 
continowed. 


Bretherein 
of  the  gild 
counsel). 


Prenteis 
Young. 


Robert  Boyd 
Thomas  Cauldwell 


Andiow  Ralstoun 
Robert  Tennent 


The  said  day  the  haill  fomamed  peisones  (except  Simeon  Tennent  Androw 
Scot  Johne  Listoun  James  Thomsone  James  Colhoun  Alexander  Egleintoun 
Jo°  Scot  W^  Crafourd  Patrick  Biyce  and  Jo"  Clark  weivers  W"  Govane  Ro* 
Bogle  Jo°  Miller  W"^  Sheills  Thomas  Cauldwell  James  Watsone  Androw 
Ralstoun  and  Ro'  Tennent)  who  wer  absent  gave  ther  oathes  to  be  faithfull 
and  trew  counsellours  to  the  deacon  cyveiner  for  ane  year  to  come. 

The  same  day  W'°  Zair  and  George  Andersone  wer  conteinowed  clerks. 

The  sd  day  Ro*  Andersone  is  conteinowed  officer  who  being  present  gave 
his  oath  as  vse  is. 

The  sd  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  with  the  fornamed  peisones  who  wer 
present  and  gave  ther  oathes  being  lykways  conveined  for  electing  four  of 
ther  number  to  sit  with  the  dean  of  gild  his  counsell  for  the  crafts  rank  for  the 
year  enshewing  be  plurahtie  of  votts  thir  persones  wer  choysen  viz  Johne  Hall 
Patrick  Bryce  malt.  Simeon  Tennent  and  Johne  Wood  and  appojmts  the 
deacon  cyveiner  to  present  them  as  vse  is. 

Dcciino  quiiUo  Octobris  167 1. 

The  said  day  Johne  Young  sone  lau"  to  Johne  Young  coalhewer  is  booked 
prenties  with  George  Lockhart  chirurgiane  for  fyve  years  as  prenteis  and  two 
years  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  twentie  eight  day 
of  September  1671. 

Atl  Glasgow  the  iioentie  third  day  of  November  jajvjc  seavintie  ane  years. 

The  said  day  being  conveined  in  the  crafts  hospitall  the  deacon  conveiner 
and  with  him  Wilham  Wallace  baillie  with  the  deacon  of  crafts  and  ther 
bretherine  of  counsell  who  for  the  most  pairt  wer  present  for  hearing  of  Mathow 
M^'Aulay  collector  his  compt  of  the  rent  belonging  to  the  crafts  house  the  last 
year  wherof  charge  and  discharge  is  as  followes  viz 

Charge. 
Imprimis  he  charges  himselfe  with  q*  he  receaved  fra  Patrick 

Biyce  last  collector  y'  remained  in  his  hands  at  his  compt 

making  is       .  .  .  .  .  .  .      186     7     2 

Item  receaved  of  poores  money  y'  wes  collected  at  the  dean  of 

gilds  court  the  last  year       .  .  .  .  .       32  16     0 

Item  receaved  fra  Johne  Neisbit  and  James  Mann  of  prin^'  soume 

y'  they  wer  resting  to  the  house  be  band    .  .  .     100     o     o 


1671]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


457 


Item  receaved  fra  Mathow  Cumyng  for  the  crafts  pairt  of  the  buket 

money  the  last  year  .....     140    o    o 

Item  the  house  pairt  of  the  Gorball  rent  the  sd  year        .  .     220     8     o 

Item  receaved  fra  James  Bowie  for  ane  years  maill  of  ane  laich 
house  and  ane  brew  house  of  v/  James  Duncanes  land  fra 
Witsonday  1670  to  Witsonday  1671  .  .  .       23     0     0 

Item  fra  W""  Leckie  mer"*  for  the  maill  of  ane  heigh  house  and  ane 

seller  of  the  sds  land  possest  be  him  the  said  year     .  •       33     6     8 

Item  fra  Thomas  Miller  wright  for  a  pairt  of  his  gildrie  fyne  y' 

wes  resting  .  .  .  .  .  .       26  13    4 

Item  fra  Patrick  Steine  as  a  p'  of  his  gildrie  fyne  .  .       66  13     4 

Item  fra  James  Crafourd  in  pairt  pay^  of  his  gildrie  fyne.  .       30     o     o 

Item  fra  Patrick  and  AlexanderWilsones  gairdners  of  ther  gildrie  fynes     36  13     4 

Item  fra  Johne  Findlay  weiver  of  his  gildrie  fyne  .  •       33     6     8 

Item  fra  Gavine  Wood  maltman  of  gildrie  fyne  .  .  .       94     o     o 

Item  fra  fyve  new  deacones  the  last  year  conforme  to  vse  and  wont 
viz  fra  the  deacone  of  hamermen  tailzeors  weivers  skiners 
baxters  at  8  pound  per  peice    inde  .  .  .       40    o     0 

Item  fra  Johne  Adame  gairdner  for  two  years  rent  of  ane  yaird 
belonging  to  the  hospitall  to  witt  fra  Candlemes  1670  to 
Candlemes  1672  .  .  .  .  .       32     0    0 

Item  receaved  from  Elizabeth  Morisoune  weidow  for  ane  years 
rent  of  ane  house  possessed  be  her  belonging  to  the  sd  hospitall 
fra  Mertimes  1670  to  Mertimes  1671  .  .  .       24     o     o 

Item  fra  James  Bryce  of  grund  anwells  belonging  to  the  sd  hospitall 

in  pairt  of  pay'  of  q'  is  resting  for  the  years  166S  and  1669     .       60     o     0 

Item  receaved  fra  Alexander  Govane  hamerman  for  ane  years 
arent  of  ane  hundreth  merks  dew  be  him  to  the  house  fra 
Mertimes  1669  to  Mertimes  1670       .  .  .  .400 

Item  fra  Johne  Neisbit  mer''  for  ane  years  arent  of  fyve  hundreth 

merks  fra  Witsonday  1670  to  Witsonday  1671  .  .       20     o     0 

Item  receaved  fra  Johne  Sheills  in  Gorballs  for  ane  year  and  halfe 
ane  years  arent  of  three  hundreth  fyftie  merks  from  \Vitson- 
day  1669   to   Mertimes    1670  .  .  .  .       21     o     0 

Item  fra  David  Miller  merchand  for  ane  years  arent  of  fyve  hundreth 

merks  from  Mertimes  1669  to  Mertimes  1670  .  .       20     0     0 

Item  fra  Hugh  Corbet  of  Hardgray  for  ane  years  arent  of  three 

hundreth  merks  the  sd  year  .  .  .  .       12     o     0 

Item  fra  Thomas  Shearer  wryter  for  the  arent  of  three  hundreth 

merks  the  sd  year  .  .  .  .  .       12     0     0 

Item  fra  James  Mann  and  his  cationers  for  ane  year  and  halfe  ane 
years  arent  of  three  hundreth  merks  fra  Mertimes  1669  to 
Witsonday  1671         .  .  .  .  .  .       iS     o     0 


458  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1671 

Item  fra  James  Ker  mer<J  for  ana  years  arent  of  eight  hundreth 

pounds  fra  Mertimes  i66g  to  Mertimes  1670  .  .       48     o     o 

Item   fra  W"  Andersone  proveist   for  ane  years  arent  of  fyve 

hundreth  merks  fra  Witsonday  1670  to  Witsonday  1671       .       20     o     o 

Item  fra  Sir  George  Maxwell  of  NetherpoUock  for  ane  year  and 
halfe  ane  years  arent  of  ane  thousand  merks  fra  Witsonday 
1670  to  Mertimes  1671  .  .  .  .  .       60     o     o 

Item  for  the  arent  of  two  hundreth  and  fyftie  merks  y*'  wes  resting 
to  the  house  be  vmq"  James  Hamiltoun  vncle  to  Hags  fra 
Witsonday  1670  to  Witsonday  1671  .  .  .       10     o     o 

Item  from  Androw  Morsoune  for  ane  years  arent  of  four  hundreth 

merks  fra  Witsonday  1670  to  Witsonday  1671        .  .       16     o     o 

Item  fra  M''  Hugh  Wallace  for  ane  years  arent  of  ane  thousand 

merks  fra  Michaehnes  1669  to  Michaelmes  1670       .  .       40     o     0 

Item  fra  the  haill  deacones  for  supplie  of  the  poore  in  the  house 

in  name  of  quarter  compts  ....     206    6    8 

Suma  of  the  charge  is       .  .  .  .   168S  17  10 

Discharge. 
Imprimis  to  the  six  men  in  the  house  at  48  1i  each  of  y'"  be  year  is     288     o     o 
Item  for  elevine  monethes  coales  at  30s.  the  moneth  is    .  .       16  10    o 

Item  for  the  six  mens  shoes  at  threttie  shilhng  the  pair  is         .         900 
Item  for  7  elnes  of  cloath  to  each  of  the  sd  six  men  to  be  shirts 

at  6s.  8d.  the  elne     inde       .  .  .  .  .       14     o     o 

Item  deburst  for  fyve  elnes  of  cloath  to  be  cloathes  to  Ro^  Andersone 

off  and  for  furnishing  and  making 
Item  lor  ane  pair  of  shoes  to  the  sd  Ro' 
Item  to  the  sd  Ro'  at  the  deacon  cyveiners  comand 
Item  given  to  Ro'  Allan  for  the  extract  of  ane  decreit  at  the  instance 

of  the  last  collector  ag'  some  persones  in  Gorballs    .  .         100 

Item  given  to  Androw  Imrik  for  casting  of  the  bard  dyke  belonging 

to  the  sd  hospitall  w'  h'me  .  .  .  .  o  16     o 

Item  given  to  M""  \^■'"  Lightbodie  for  his  paines  and  service  in 

the  house  affairs       .  .  .  .  .  .         8  14     0 

Item  given  to  Mathow  Fausyd  baxter  for  his  help  and  suppUe  at 

comand  of  the  deacon  conveiner  and  deacones         .  .       15     0     o 

Item  given  to  the  deacon  cyveiner  by  ordour  of  the  deacones  for 

his  charges  and  expenss  in  going  to  Edinburgh  anent  the 

crafts  affairs  ..... 

Item  to  the  clerks  for  ther  flail  .  .  .  , 

Item  to  the  officer  for  Iris  fiall     ..... 
Item  deburst  to  the  poore  at  Hallowmes  court  by  ordour  and 

severall    tymes   sensyne        .  .  .  .  .     135  12    o 


3  13 

8 

2     0 

0 

2  18 

0 

29 

0 

0 

26 

13 

4 

20 

0 

0 

1671)       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  459 

Item  deburst  to  James  Andersone  for  the  house  pairt  of  the  few 

dewtie  the  crops  1669  and  1670       .  .  .  .       34  10     o 

Item  deburst  to  the  factor  of  the  CoUedge  of  Glasgow  for  M''  Johne 

Howiesones    bursor  .  .  .  .  .       66  13     4 

Item  to  Ro'  Boyd  maissone  for  anc  harth  stone  hewing  and  laying 
in  vmq"  James  Duncanes  land  in  y'  house  yrof  possest  be 
W™  Leckie  3  ll  and  for  mending  the  prese  in  ane  bed  foote 
of  the  sd  land  in  y^  house  possest  be  James  Bowie  8s.     inde         380 
Suiria  of  the  discharge        ....     687     8     4 

Sua  charge  and  discharge  being  compared  tlier  rests  in  the 
compters  hand  nyne  hundreth  ane  pound  nyne  shilling  six  pennies. 
In  the  first  end  of  the  qlk  soume  he  gave  in  ane  band  qlk  wes  pute  in 
the  box  for  four  hundreth  threttie  three  pound  sex  shilling  and 
eight  pennies  granted  in  favors  of  the  poore  of  the  house  be  Archbald 
Stewart  sone  to  Scotstoun  as  prin"  and  Ro'  Stewart  his  cau''  bearing 
arent  fra  Mertimes  last.  So  ther  remaines  only  in  the  compters 
hand  by  and  attour  y'  band  four  hundreth  sextie  eight  pound 
ellevine  shilhng  four  pennies. 

Qlk  compt  abovewrin  being  at  lenth  red  calculat  and  laid  wes  allowed 
and  approvine  and  the  compter  discharged  accordinglie  he  payand  in  the  sd 
soume  of  four  hundreth  sextie  eight  pound  elevine  shilling  four  pennies. 

The  sd  day  JIathow  il'^^Caulay  last  collector  wes  continowed  collector  for  ip.A.iilay 
ane  year  to  come  who  did  accept  and  give  his  oath  and  ther  wes  produced  be  coUector"^*^ 
Simeon  Tennent  of  burges  silver  threttie  eight  pound  threttein  shilling  four 
pennies  qlk  wes  given  to  the  sd  collector  with  the  qlk  soume  and  with  the  sd 
468  tl  IIS.  4d.  y'  remaines  in  his  hand  of  the  last  compt  he  is  to  be  charged 
at  his  next  compt  making. 

The  said  day  Johne  Scot  Simeon  Tennent  W"  Crafourd  Ro*  Bogle  Jo"  Counsellours 
Miller  Thomas  Cauldwell  and  Ro'  Tennent  gave  ther  oathes  as  counsellours  to  ^^™™*^' 
the  deacon  cyveiner  for  ane  j'ear  to  come. 

The  said  day  ther  wes  ane  band  of  ane  thousand  merks  owing  to  the  house  Netherpollock 

be  Sir  George  Maxwell  of  Netherpollock  given  to  the  collector  to  be  delyvered  destroyed  and 

to  the  sd  Sir  George  in  respect  he  had  payed  the  samen  in  to  the  collector  and  J""  Find^ay 

appoynts  him  to  receave  Johne  Findlay  his  band  for  the  sd  soume  and  to  lend  for  1000  merk! 
him  the  same  to  [be]  payed  at  Mertimes  next  with  ane  j'ears  arent. 

The  said  day  Mathow  .M^Aulay  collector  produced  ane  band  granted  to  Bands  pute  in 
the  house  be  Gavine  Weddell  as  prin'i  and  Johne  Gilhagie  as  cau''  of  two  hundreth  "'^  ^°^' 
and  fyftie  merks  being  arent  fra  Witsonday  last  Item  ane  other  band  granted 
be  James  Man  and  his  cau^  of  hundreth  pounds  scots  at  arent  fra  Witsonday 
last  qch  wer  pute  in  the  box. 


46o  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1671 

Alt  Glasgoiv  the  cllevint  day  of  December  1671. 
Convened   W™   Wallace   bailUe   James   Farie   deacon   cyveiner 
Johne  Hall  with  the  present  deacones  and  these  y'  wer  deacones  the 
last  year  and  severall  others  of  the  bretherine  of  counsell. 

Act  ratified  The  said  daj?  tlie  fomamed  persones  taking  to  ther  consideratione  ane  act 

o"p°enteiss'.  ^  made  be  ther  predicessors  dated  the  twentie  day  of  December  1613  years 
anent  booking  of  prenteiss  in  the  deacon  cyveiners  book  and  others  and  y* 
the  samen  hes  bein  evill  observed  be  the  reptive  crafts  this  tyme  bypast  have 
renewed  ratiffied  and  approven  and  heirby  renewes  ratiffies  and  approves  of 
the  samen  in  the  haill  heids  and  articles  therof  and  ordaines  the  haiU  reptive 
crafts  to  observe  and  keep  the  same  in  tyme  comeing  vnder  the  panes  and 
penalties  therin  conteined  and  ordaines  everie  deacon  to  tak  out  ane  extract 
therof  and  cause  book  it  in  their  owne  calhngs  book  and  to  intimat  the  samen 
to  ther  owne  calling  at  y""  first  melting  that  non  may  pretend  ignorance. 

Danizeiis  The  said  day  the  haill  persones  abovewrin  did  ratififie  and  approve  of  ane 

Drewralfflicd.  decreit  given  and  pronunced  be  Alex^  EgUntoun  deacon  of  wrights  with  his 
maisters  and  most  of  ther  calling  against  George  Drew  wright  dated  the  twenty 
fourt  day  of  Februarij  1671  by  the  qch  decreit  he  is  fyned  and  vnlawed  in  ane 
new  wpset  of  twentie  merks  for  abuseing  of  Alex""  Daniell  late  deacon  of  wrights 
in  maner  conteined  in  the  de'  as  the  samen  at  lenth  bears  and  qlk  twentie 
merks  the  fomamed  persones  ordaines  to  be  given  to  the  deacon  of  wrights 
to  help  to  pute  W'"  Reid  sone  to  David  Reid  to  ane  calhng  and  the  sd  George 
Drew  to  give  satisfactione  to  the  sd  Alex''  Daniell  and  farder  they  heirby 
declare  the  sd  George  Drew  vncapable  to  give  ane  vote  in  his  caUing  or  to  bear 
any  office  or  charge  yrin  or  in  the  deacon  cyveiners  house  in  tyme  comeing. 

Bryce  band  of  The  said  day  ther  wes  ane  band  granted  be  Patrick  Bryce  weiver  as  prin" 

pu'te7"the  ^nd  Ro*  Bogle  skinner  and  serall  oyi^s  as  caurs  for  him  to  the  crafts  house  for 

box  and  ggx  hundreth  merks  borrowed  fra  3'™  bearing  arent  fra  Mertimes  last  payable 

given  to  the  at  Mertimes  nixt  pute  in  the  box  and  Johne  Sheills  in  Gorballs  his  band  of 

putrto'^ '°  350  merks  wes  given  to  the  collector  either  y'  he  might  get  pay*  or  new  securitie 

executione.  ^-^  to  pute  the  band  to  executione  against  him  and  his  caurs. 

Sevinlein  of  Februarij  1672. 
Prenteis  The  sd  day  James  Bowman  sone  lau^'  to  vmq"  James  Bowman  in  Blaqu- 

hairne  is  booked  prenteis  w'  W»'  Park  cordouner  for  fyve  years  as  prenteis 
and  y'  fra  his  enterie  at  Witsonday  last  conforme  to  the  indentor  dated  the 
fourt  of  December  last. 

Prenteis  The  said  day  W'"  M^Aulay  sone  lau"  to  \'mq"  Aulay  M^'Aulay  workman 

M'.^uiay.  .^  booked  prenteis  w^  Jo"  Scot  yo^  tailzeour  for  fyve  years  and  two  year  for 

meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  second  day  of  Februarij 

1672. 


Bowman. 


1672]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  461 

Prima  Augiistj  1672. 
Wm  Ferffiisone  sone  to    Tohne  Fererusone  in  Airden  is  booked  pienteis  Pfenteis 

°  ''  °  "^  Fergusone. 

with  W""  Fergiisone  tailzeour  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meit  and  fie  conforme 
to  the  indentour  dated  the  eight  of  Februarij  i66o. 

The  sd  day  Arthour  Colhoiin  sone  to  vmq"  Arthour  Colhoun  of  Benmure  Prenteis 
is  booked  prenteis  w'  Johne  Corse  wright  for  seavine  year  and  two  year  for 
meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentor  past  yranent  dated  the  twentie  eight 
day  of  Februarij  1672. 

Decimo  septimo  Atigustj  1672. 
Conveined  the  deacon  cyveiner  with  Johne  Hall  and  the  deacones 
of  crafts  who  for  the  most  pairt  wer  present. 
The  said  day  Alexander  Park  fleshour  wes  fyned  and  vnlawed  in  fyve  Parkunlawed. 
pound  and  sextein  shilling  scots  for  calling  of  Johne  Barrie  present  deacon  of 
the  fleshours  ane  knawe  and  ane  Iyer  qlk  wes  sufficientlie  proven  be  famous 
witness  and  ordained  to  give  satisfactione  to  the  deacon  qlk  fyne  wes  given  to 
James  Jap  for  his  supplie. 

Alt  Glasgow  the  second  day  of  September  1672. 
The  said  day  W"*  Wallace  baillie  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  Johne  Hall  Extent  of  the 
with  the  deacones  of  crafts  and  Mathow  M^Aulay  the  collector  being  conveined  ui°e'^cropr°' 
for  casting  of  the  Gorball  rent  the  cropt  1671  they  did  find  the  samen  to  be  '*7i- 
conforme  to  the  fear  the  sd  year  of  frie  monej*  being  sevine  pound  fourtie 
pennies  the  boll  by  and  attour  ane  hundreth  threttine  pound  six  shilling  scots 
deburst  out  of  the  first  end  of  the  crafts  pairt  of  the  Gorball  teynds  for  the 
ministers  of  Govanes  stipend  ellevine  hundreth  fyftie  three  pound  sextein 
shilling  four  pennies  scots  qlk  being  divyded  in  threttie  on  pairts  ther  falls 
for  ilk  thousand  merks  threttie  seavine  pound  four  shilling  and  four  pennies 
qlk  the  collector  is  appoynted  to  pay  to  the  reptive  crafts  conforme  to  yr 
proportiounes. 

Seavinlein  of  September  1672. 
Conveined    W"'    Wallace    baillie    deacon    cyveiner    Johne    Hall 
deacones  of  hamermen   tailzeours  cordouners  skinners  chirurgianes 
maltmen  weivers  maissones  cowpers  wrights  fleshours  bonetmakers 
gairdners  and  Mathow  M<=Aulay  collector. 
The  said  report  wes  made  that  the  ratificatione  of  the  gildrie  wes  past  in  Report 
parliament  with  the  qlk  they  wer  all  well  satisfied  and  approved  therof  and  ^^f^  '1'* 
the  fornamed  persones  having  taken  to  ther  consideratione  how  the  charges  the  giidne  in 
and  expenss  of  the  same  sould  be  payed  they  appoynted  BailUe  Wallace  Johne  h^v'the" 
Hall  deacon  cyveiner  and  Patrick  Brj'ce  to  revise  the  compt  and  to  cast  the  e-^penss  therof 
samen  amongst  the  reptive  crafts  as  they  thought  fitt  and  to  report  the  nixt  payed, 
melting  and  as  the  samen  sould  be  casten  the  abovenamed  deacones  obleiged 
y""  and  ther  successors  to  pay  the  same  accordinglie. 


462 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1672 


Ratificatione 
of  the  gjldrie 
pute  in  the 
box  and  the 
compt  of  the 
expenss  yrof 
allowed  and 
approveu. 


Septimo  Odobris  1672. 

The  said  day  conveined  James  Farie  present  baillie  and  deacon 
cyveiner  W™  Wallace  late  baillie  Johne  Hall  with  the  deacones  of 
hamermen  tailzeors  cordouners  Patrick  Br^xe  maltman  deacones  of 
Wrights  maissones  baxters  skiners  cowpers  chirurgianes  wei\'ers 
gairners  and  these  who  wer  deacones  the  last  year  for  the  most  pairt 
being  present  with  INIathow  M'^Aulay  collector. 

The  same  day  the  ratificatione  of  the  gildrie  in  parlia'  wes  read  and  pute 
in  the  box  and  report  wes  made  be  Bailhe  Farie  \\''"  Wallace  Jo"  Hall  and 
Patrick  Bryce  how  they  had  casten  on  the  expenss  of  the  sd  ratificatione 
amongst  the  reptive  craftis  and  y'  the  haill  charges  and  expenss  the  samen  had 
coast  wes  ane  thousand  four  himdreth  four  score  three  pound  sevine  shilling 
and  eight  pennies  scots  conforme  to  the  particular  accompt  therof  qlk  compt 
with  the  forsaid  cast  wes  allowed  and  approven  off  and  they  hartihe  thanked 
for  ther  dihgence  and  panes  in  y*  affair  and  ordaines  everie  deacone  to  pay 
in  ther  reptive  proportione  conforme  to  the  cast  as  the  samen  wes  red  to  y™ 
to  Patrik  Bryce  maltman  with  ther  first  conveinencie. 


Lyts  deacon 
conveiner. 


Bryce  dicon 
cyveiner. 


Prenteis 
Pirrie. 


Att  Glasgow  the  nynt  day  of  October  1672. 

The  said  day  James  Farie  present  bailhe  W™  Wallace  late  baillie  and  Johne 
Hall  with  the  deacones  of  crafts  and  ther  bretherine  of  counsell  being  conveined 
for  electing  three  of  ther  number  to  be  presented  to  the  proveist  baillies  and 
counsell  of  this  burgh  and  others  concerned  to  the  effect  ane  of  them  may  be 
choysen  to  be  deacon  conveiner  therof  for  ane  year  to  come  be  pluralitie  of 
\-ots  ^^'>"  Wallace  Johne  Hall  and  Patrick  Bryce  wer  made  choyse  of  to  the 
effect  forsd  and  appoynts  the  lyts  to  be  presented  be  the  deacones  of  hamermen 
and  tailzeours. 

Therefter  the  same  day  Patrick  Bryce  wes  choysen  deacon  conveiner  for 
ane  year  to  come. 

The  sd  day  W"'  Pirrie  wes  booked  as  prenteis  to  Jo"  Clark  maisone  for 
nync  vears  indentor  dated  the  7  of  March  1660. 


Att  Glasgow  the  tent  day  of  October  1672. 

Followes  the  names  of  those  who  ar  choysen  to  be  wpon  the  deacon  conveiners 
house  for  ane  year  to  come  and  first  the  deacones. 


Alexander  Govane 
W"!  Watsone 
Johne  \\"ood 


Johne  Findlay 
Alex""  Danizell 
Ar<»  Bogle 


1672]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  463 


William  Glen 
Johne  Patersone 
Robert  Bovd 


Ro'  Bogle 
James  Smith 
James  Gilmour 
Niniane  Spence 
Ro'  Tennent 


James  Farie  bailj'ie 

Hamermen     \V"'  Philp  Maltmen 

Patrick  M'llvicar 
\V'"  Grahame 
Tho.  M'^^Cure 
Johne  Rankine 

Tailzeours       Robert  Thcmsone 
Johne  Gilchreist 
Simeon  Tennent 
Andrew  Scot 
James  Blair 

Cordouners     Johne  Listoun 

James  Thomsone 
Johne  Park 
Johne  Wodrop 
James  Hutchesone 

Baxters  Daniell  Purdoun 

Johne  Scot 


Wrights 

Chirurgianes 
Skinners 

Cowpers 
Fleshours 


W"!  Wallace 
Johne  Bryssoune 
Johne  Robertsone 
Johne  Parke 
Mathow  M^Aulay 

James  Colquhoun 
Johne  Otterburne 


Johne  Hall 

Andrew  Elphingstoun 

W"'  Cochrane 
W  ■"  Govane 

James  Sheills 
Robert  Findlay 

Johne  Barrie 
James  Watsone 


Bonetmakers    Johne  Walker 


Waivers  Walter  Stewart 

Patrick  Biyce 
Ro^  Falconer  Gairdiners 

Maissounes     Johne  Clarke 

Thomas  Cauldwell  elder 


W'"  Hutchesone 
Andrew  Ralstoun 


The  said  day  the  haill  fornamed  persenes  gav-e  ther  oathes  to  be  trew  and  Counsellours 
faithful!  counsellours  to  the  deacon  cyveiner  for  ane  year  to  come  except  the  absenfsf" 
persenes  following  viz  Johne  Hall  James  Celhoun  Wilham  Grahame  Andrew 
Scot   James  Thomsone  Walter  Stewart   Patrick   Bryce  weiver  W"^  Govane 
Daniell  Purdoun  Johne  Scot  Johne  Walker  who  wer  all  absent. 


The  said  day  the  clerks  and  the  officer  wer  conteinowed. 


464 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1672 


Bretherine  of 
the  gild 
counsel!. 


Prenteis 
Guthrie. 


Prenteis 
Davidsone. 


Prenteis 
Angous. 


The  samen  day  the  fomamed  persones  who  wer  present  and  gave  ther 
oathes  being  lykwayes  con\-eined  with  the  deacon  cyveiner  for  choyseing  four 
of  ther  number  to  be  of  the  dean  of  gild  his  brethrein  of  counsel!  for  the  crafts 
rank  this  year  to  come  be  pluralitie  of  vots  the  persones  following  wer  choysen 
viz  W™  \\'allace  Johne  Hall  Simeon  Tennent  and  Johne  \\"ood  and  appoynts 
the  deacon  cyveiner  to  present  them  as  vse  is. 

Nyiit  of  November  1672. 

The  sd  day  Johne  Guthrie  is  booked  prenteis  with  Androw  Broun  weiver 
for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentor  dated  the 
twentie  third  of  October  1672. 

10  0/  AV  1672. 

The  said  day  Alex''  Davidsone  sone  to  Alex''  Davidsone  in  Murehouse  is 
booked  as  prenteis  to  James  Davidsone  tailzeor  for  fyve  years  and  two  year 
for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentor  dated  the  30  of  October  last. 

Viginti  No"^  1672. 

The  said  day  W'"  Angous  is  booked  prenteis  with  W"'  Liggate  tailzeour 
for  fyve  j-ears  and  two  year  for  meat  and  lie  conforme  to  the  indentor  dated 
the  eight  day  of  No''  1672. 

Glasgow  vigesimo  secitndo  Novembris  1672. 

The  said  day  Patrick  Bryce  deacon  cyveiner  James  Farie  baillie  W"" 
\\'allace  and  Johne  Hall  with  the  deacones  of  crafts  and  ther  brethrein  of 
counsell  for  the  most  pairt  being  conveined  in  the  crafts  hospitall  for  hearing 
of  Mathow  Mt'Aulay  his  compt  of  the  rent  belonging  to  the  crafts  house  intro- 
metted  with  be  him  since  his  last  compt  making  till  this  tyme  qrof  charge  and 
discharg  is  as  followes  and  first  the  charge  viz 

Charge. 
Imprimis  he  charges  himselfe  with  q*  remained  in  his  hands  at 

his  compt  making  the  last  year  qlk  is  .  .  .     468  11     4 

Item  that    he  receaved  of   burges  silver  that  wes  gotten  at  the 

dean  of  gilds  court  .  .  .  .  .       38  13     4 

Item  y'  he  receaved  fra  the  haill  deacones  in  name  of  quarter 

compts  for  suphe  of  the  poore  in  the  crafts  house    .  .     209  13     4 

Item  receaved  fra  Johne  Neisbit  yo''  mer^  for  ane  years  arent  of 

fyve  hundreth  merks  fra  Witsonday  1671  to  the  terme  of 

Witsonday  1672         .  .  .  .  .  .       20     0     o 

Item  receaved  fra  Johne  Sheills  in  GorbaUs  for  ane  years  arent 

of  three  hundreth  and  fyftie  merks  fra  Mertimes  1670  to 

Mertimes    1671  .  .  .  .  .  .       14     o     o 


1672]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  465 

Item  receaved  fra  Alexander  Govane  for  ane  years  arent  of  ane 

hundreth  merks  resting  fra  Mertimes  1670  to  Mertimes  1671         400 

Item  fra  David  Miller  mer''  for  ane  year  and  ane  halfe  years  arent 
of  fyve  hundreth  merks  resting  fra  Mertimes  1670  to  Wit- 
sonday    1672  .  .  .  .  .  .       30     o     o 

Item  receaved  fra  Johne  Corse  wright  for  ane  vears  arent  of  six 

hundreth  merks  fra  Mertimes  1670  to  Mertimes  1671  .       24     o     o 

Item  y'  he  receaved  fra  Hugh  Corbet  of  Hargray  for  ane  years 
arent  of  three  hundreth  merks  fra  Mertimes  1670  to  Mertimes 

1671  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       12     o     o 

Item  fra  Thomas  Shearer  wn^'ter  for  ane  years  arent  of  three 

hundreth  merks  the  sd  year  .  .  .  .       12     o     o 

Item  fra  Androw  Morsoune  for  ane  years  arent  of  four  hundreth 

merks  the  sd  year  .  .  .  .  .       16    o    o 

Item  fra  James  Ker  for  twa  years  arent  of  eight  hundreth  pound 

fra  Mertimes  1670  to  Mertimes  1672  .  .  .       96     o     o 

Item  fra  James  Mann  for  ane  years  arent  of  ane  hundreth  pound 

fra  Witsonday  1671  to  Whitsonday  1672     .  .  .600 

Item  fra  William  Andersone  proveist  for  ane  years  arent  of  fyve 

hundreth  merks  fra  Witsonday  167 1  to  Witsonday  1672       .       20     o     o 
Item  receaved  fra  W'"  Leckie  mer''  for  ane  years  maill  of  ane 

heigh  house  possest  be  him  of  James  Duncanes  land  fra  Wit- 
sonday 1671  to  Whitsonday  1672      .  .  .  .       33     6     8 
Item  fra  James  Bowie  for  ane  years  maill  of  ane  laigh  house  and 

brew  house  possest  be  him  of  the  sds  lands  the  sd  year         .       22     o    o 
Item  receaved  fra  the  deacone  of  tailzeors  and  fleshours  as  being 

new  deacones  conforme  to  vse  and  wont  at  8  tl  p.  peice  is       16     o     o 
Item  receaved  fra  James  Bryce  in  pairt  pay'  of  the  few  dewties 

belonging  to  the  house  for  the  year  1669  and  1670  .  .       54     o     o 

Item  receaved  fra  Robert  Aickinehead  wright  in  pairt  pay'  of  his 

gildrie  fyne  ...... 

Item  fra  Robert  Dickie  wright  y'  wes  resting  of  his  gildrie  fyne 
Item  receaved  fra  Johne  Scot  tailzeour  in  pairt  pay'  of  his  gildrie 

fyne  ....... 

Item  fra  Johne  Rankein  hamerman  of  his  gildrie  fyne  that  wes  resting 
Item  fra  Alex''  Wilsone  gairdner  as  cau"'  for  his  brother  Patrick 

Wilsone  resting  of  his  gildrie  fyne  .... 
Item  receaved  as  the  house  pairt  of  the  Gorball  rent  the  last  year 
Item  receaved  for  the  old  timber  in  the  house  y'  wes  taken  doune 

besyd  the  hospitall  y'  is  now  Androw  Blaks  smidie  .  .         2  13     4 

Item  fra  Johne  Adame  gairdiner   for  ane  years  rent  of  y'  yaird 

belonging  to  the  sd  hospitall   possest  be  him  fra  Candlemes 

1672  to  Candlemes  1673       .  .  .  .  .       16    o    o 

2F 


66 

13 

4 

40 

0 

0 

50 

0 

0 

66 

13 

4 

13 

6 

8 

97 

14 

8 

S8 

0 

0 

i6 

10 

0 

9 

0 

0 

14 

0 

0 

466  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1672 

Item  receaved  fra  David  Miller  at  Whitsonday  last  that  he  wes 

owing  to  the  sd  hospitall  be  his  band  .  .  .     333     6     8 

Summa   of   the   charge        ....   1982  12     8 

Discharge. 
Imprimis  deburst  to  the  sex  old  men  in  the  house  at  48  ti  per 

peice  is  ......  . 

Item  for  ellevine  monethes  coales  to  y'"  at  30s.  p.  mensem 

Item  for  ane  pair  of  shoes  to  each  of  y'"  at  30s.  the  pair  being  sex 

pair   is  ......  . 

Item  for  shirts  to  y'"  conforme  to  the  compt 

Item  lent  to  Patrick  Bryce  weiver  and  his  cau''s  wpon  band  bearing 

arent  .......     400     o     0 

Item  deburst  to  severall  poore  persones  be  warrand  of  the  deacon 

cj'veiner   and   deacones   cyveined   at    Hutchesones   hospitall 
Item  to  the  colledge  factor  for  Howisones  bursour 
Item  to  the  clerks  for  ther  fiell    ..... 
Item  deburst  for  the  crafts  pairt  for  outputting  the  blew  coats 

for  the  Gorballs        .  .  .  .  .  .       11     o     o 

Item  deburst  for  glasework  and  for  kebers  and  naills  and  timber 

and  strae  and  others  for  v/  James  Duncanes  land  and  for 

repairing  the  same  conforme  to  the  compt    .  .  .834 

Item  deburst  for  building  of  the  smidie  possest  be  Androw  Blak 

and  for  furnishing  strae  and  clay  and  reding  the  ground  and 

taking  awav  the  red  conforme  to  ane  particular  accompt     .     iii  13     4 
Item  deburst  to  severall  poore  persones  at  severall  tymes  by  ordour 

of  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  some  of  the  deacones       .  .       47     0     o 

Item  to  Ro'  .\ndersone  off"'  to  the  house  for  his  fiall       .  .       20     o     0 

Item  for  cloath  to  be  ane  syd  coat  to  the  sd  off""  and  making  and 

furnishing  to  it  . 


b3 

0 

0 

66 

13 

4 

26 

13 

4 

Item  given  to  Robert  Andersone  be  ordour  of  the 


II  12     o 


home  and  afeild 
he  spent  in  the 


4 
6 


and   deacones 

Item  deburst  to  Jo"  Douglas  and  Ro'  Smellie  off''s  for  ther  attend- 
ance at  the  electione  of  the  deacones 

Item  to  the  workmen  y'  caried  the  crafts  buckles 
q"  the  fyre  wes  in  the  Gallowgate 

Item  given  to  Patrick  Brjxe  deacon  cy\einer  y' 
treds   affairs  ... 

Item  to  Hendrie  Colhoun  for  wyreing  the  hospitall  windows  and 

dressing  the  bell  ther  .  .  .  .  .       28     5  10 

Item  to  Androw  Blake  for  iron  worke  to  the  bell  .  .         i  16     o 

Item  for  cloath  to  be  cloathes  to  the  six  men  in  the  house  and  for 

furnishing  and  making  of  y">  ccnforme  to  the  compt  .         (  ) 


8  10 


deacon  cyveiner 


1672]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  467 

Item  the  compters  owne  fiall        .  .  .  .  .       16  13    4 

Item  lent  wpon  band  at  Witsonday  last  to  the  Laird  of  Ardincapleyo''  333     6     8 

Suma  of  the  discharge  is     .  .  .  .    1660     6     o 

Sua  charge  and  discharge  being  compared  ther  rests  in  the 
compters  hand  the  soume  of  three  hmidreth  twentie  two  pounds 
sex  shilling  qlk  he  is  appoynted  to  pay  to  the  subsequent  collector. 

Quhilk  compt  abovewrln  being  at  lenth  calculat  and  laid  both  charge 
and  discharge  therof  forsd  wes  allowed  and  approvine  and  the  compter  dis- 
charged accordinglie  he  payand  the  sd  soume  of  322  1i  6s. 

The  sd  day  Johne  Hall  W"  Grahame  James  Thomsone  Patrick  Bryce  Counseliours 
weiver  Johne  Walker  gave  ther  oathes  as  counseliours  to  the  deacon  cyveiner    "'°''"''- 
for  this  enshewing  year. 

The  sd  day  the  forsd  deacon  cyveiner  and  remanent  persones  taking  to  Anent  the 
ther  consideratione  the  lose  that  the  house  susteines  be  the  negligent  ingathering  dewUe'fand 
of   ther  small    few  dewties  and  grund  anw^ells  they  have  therfore  appoynted  the  coU'rs  fial 

°  -'  r  r    J  augmented  to 

and  ordained  and  heirby  appoynts  and  ordaines  that  whoever  beis  collector  24  lib.  scotis. 
to  the  house  and  his  successors  in  office  to  collect  and  ingather  the  sds  few 
dewties  and  ground  anwells  ycarlie  and  to  mak  compt  reckoning  and  pay* 
of  the  samen  and  that  the  sd  collector  his  fiall  yearhe  be  twentie  four  pounds 
scots  in  tyme  comeing. 

The  said  day  Johne  Wodrop  tanner  be  pluralitie  of  vots  wes  ellected  and  Wodrop 
choysen  collector  to  the  crafts  house  for  ane  year  to  come  who  did  accept  and  coUecto'r. 
give  his  oath  of  fidelitie  as  vse  is. 

The  same  day  Mathow  M^^Aulay  last  collector  produced  the  bands  following  Bands 
conteining  the  soumes  therin  and  eftermentioned  qlk  war  given  to  Johne  Wodrop  the  last 
new  choysen  collector  with  the  qlk  bands  and  soumes  he  is  to  be  charged  at  collector  and 

eiven  to  the; 

his  compt  making  viz  In  the  first  ane  band  granted  be  Ro*  Aikenheid  for  the  present 
poore  of  the  sd  crafts  hospitall  qrby  he  rests  awand  to  y^"  threttie  thrie  pound 
sex  shilhng  and  eight  pennies  scots  money  Item  ane  other  band  granted  be 
James  Crafourd  qrby  he  is  resting  threttie  pounds  scots  Item  ane  other  band 
be  Johne  Scot  yo''  tailzeor  qrby  he  is  owand  to  the  house  fyftie  pound  Item 
ane  band  granted  be  Johne  Hoge  hamerman  of  ane  hundreth  pound  qlk  he  is 
dew  to  the  sd  hospitall  Item  ane  band  dew  to  M''  Ro'  Naper  of  ane  hundreth 
pounds  scots  Item  W"^  Lidell  wright  his  band  of  ane  hundreth  and  twentie 
pounds  y'  he  is  owing  Item  Androw  Craig  hamerman  his  band  of  ane  hundreth 
and  twentie  pounds  qlk  he  is  also  dew  for  to  the  house  Item  ane  band  granted 
be  Ro'  Paull  qrby  he  rests  ane  hundreth  pound  Item  W™  Marshell  his  band 
of  ane  hundreth  pounds  Item  James  Pollock  hamerman  his  band  of  ane 
hundreth  pounds  qlk  he  rests  to  the  sd  hospitall. 


collector. 


Wrytts  pute 
in  the  box. 


468 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW, 


[1672 


The  said  day  ther  wes  produced  ane  band  granted  to  the  Laird  of  Ardin- 
caple  yo'"  to  the  house  qrby  he  owes  y"^  three  hundreth  threttie  thrie  pound 
sex  shilhng  and  eight  pennies  qlk  he  borrowed  at  Witsonday  last  Item  ane 
tak  of  ane  peice  yaird  belonging  to  the  hospitall  granted  to  Jo"  Adame  and 
Androw  Blak  his  tak  of  ane  house  and  smidie  also  belonging  to  the  house 
qlk  wer  pute  in  the  box. 


Money  qlk  the  The  sd  day  ther  wes  produced  of  burges  money  twentie  nyn  pound  eightein 

collector  is  to  ,      ■'  ,  •  ,,  .  ,         "  ,,".,,>. 

be  charged       shillmg  and  eight  pennies  qlk  wes  given  to  the  present  collector  with  the  qlk 
""^'  he  is  to  be  charged  at  his  compt  making. 

Bands  siven  to  The  same  day  the  Laird  of  Hardgray  his  band  of  three  hundreth  merks 

the  collector.  o     ./ 

Androw  Morsoune  his  band  of  four  hundreth  merks  M''  Hugh  Wallace  band  of 
ane  thousand  merks  and  Johne  Neisbit  his  band  of  fyve  hundreth  merks  all 
owing  be  y™  to  the  sd  hospitall  wer  taken  out  of  the  box  and  given  to  the 
collector  to  pute  to  execution  ag^  them  for  pay'  of  the  money  or  getting  new 
securitie. 


Wilsone 
bursare. 


The  said  day  it  is  appoj'nted  and  ordained  that  ane  presentatione  be 
granted  to  Mathow  Wilsone  sone  to  Mathow  Wilsone  tanner  of  that  bursars 
place  of  philosophie  in  the  Colledge  of  Glasgow  at  the  crafts  presentatione 
confonne  to  M"'  Johne  Howisones  mortificatione  and  that  the  sd  Mathow  is 
to  enter  therto  so  soone  as  the  samen  is  vaicand. 


Att  Glasgow  the  tweiiHe  third  of  No^  1672. 

Conveined  in  Hutchesones  hospitall  the  deacon  cyveiner  Ja. 
Farie  bailhe  W'"  Wallace  Jo"  Hall  with  the  deacones  of  crafts  and 
these  who  wer  deacones  the  last  year  for  the  most  pairt  w'  Jo"  Wodrop 
collector  and  severall  oy"^  of  yr  brethrine  of  counsell. 


Warrand 
collector. 


The  sd  day  ordanes  the  collector  to  pay  the  soume  of  two  hundreth  sixtein 
pound  six  shilling  scots  to  severall  poore  persones  in  the  toun  for  yr  help  and 
supplie  conforme  to  the  hst  sett  doune  as  also  to  give  eight  pound  to  the  ofi^ 
and  four  pound  to  Ro'  Smellie. 


Persones  The  same  da\'  appoynts  the  deacon  cyveiner  W™  \\'allace  and  Jo"  Hall 

clear  corapts^    with  the  deacones  of  hamermen  and  tailzeors  to  clear  compts  w*  James  Bryce 
w'  J  a.  Bryce.    anent  his  intromissiounes  w'  the  few  dewties  and  ground  anwells  belonging  to 
the  crafts  hospitall. 


Ratific.-itione  The  sd  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  remanent  psones  forsd  being  con- 

favors  of  the     veined  as  sd  is  anent  ane  suplicatione  presented  to  them  be  the  deacon  of 
hamermen.       hamermen  and  his  maisters  of  craft  and  haill  incorpora~une  yrof  craveing  ane 
act  of  the  sd  hamermen  calling  to  be  ratiffied  and  approven  be  them  quhairof 


1672]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  469 

the  tennor  foUowes.     Att  the  crafts  hospitall  the  (  )  day  of  jajvjc 

(  )  years  the  deacon  of  hamermen  haill  maisters  of  craft  and  the 

whole  bodie  of  the  calhng  being  conveincd  and  taking  to  ther  considera~n 
that  ther  poore  multiphes  wpon  them  and  they  not  being  able  to  supplie  y'" 
and  finding  y*  strangers  who  hes  never  served  ther  prentisships  with  friemen 
of  the  sd  incorpora~une  enters  friemen  for  pay'  of  ane  verie  litle  and  incon- 
siderable soume  of  money  sua  y'  ther  is  verie  litle  betuixt  these  that  hes  served 
ther  prentiships  with  friemen  and  these  who  ar  altogether  strangers  and  hes 
ne\'er  served  at  all  therfore  that  the  poore  of  our  tred  may  be  the  better  suphed 
and  that  the  farder  abuse  of  promiscouse  admissiounes  of  friemen  may  be 
stoped  for  tj'me  to  come  it  is  statute  and  ordained  that  no  stranger  at  any 
time  heirefter  sail  be  admitted  frieman  of  the  sd  calling  except  he  pay  for  his 
wpsett  the  soume  of  ane  hundreth  pounds  scots  money  and  that  it  sail  not  be 
in  the  power  of  any  deacon  maister  of  craft  or  any  persone  member  within 
the  sd  incorpora'une  at  any  tyme  heirefter  to  alter  or  change  the  sd  act  either 
for  moyane  or  friendship  bot  y'  the  sd  act  sail  stand  as  ane  perpetuall  law  for 
the  sd  incorporatione  and  that  q'ever  psone  deacon  maister  of  craft  or  any 
member  yrof  sail  alter  or  change  the  sd  act  sail  be  lyable  to  the  said  soume 
of  ane  hundreth  pounds  scots  as  ane  fyne  modified  presenthe  by  ws  as  lykwayes 
the  sd  deacon  maisters  of  crafts  and  haill  incorporatione  humbUe  intreatis 
y'  this  present  act  may  be  presented  to  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones  of 
crafts  and  ther  assisters  at  ther  first  melting  that  the  same  may  be  ratiffied 
be  y™  in  the  haill  poynts  yrof.  Efter  reading  of  the  sd  act  the  sd  deacon 
cyveiner  and  deacones  of  crafts  and  his  bretherine  of  counsell  present  having 
takine  the  same  to  ther  consideratione  and  finding  the  desyre  to  be  reasonable 
they  all  in  on  voyce  have  ratiffied  and  approven  and  be  thir  presents  ratiffies 
and  approves  the  sd  act  in  the  haill  heids  articles  and  poj'nts  yrof  and  ordaines 
the  samen  to  be  regrat  in  the  cyveiners  book  and  his  clerk  to  give  out  ane 
extract  yrof  vnder  his  hand  with  this  present  ratitftcatione  of  the  same  and 
that  the  samen  be  read  once  in  the  year  to  the  sd  hamermen  calhng  be  ther 
clerk  y'  non  may  pretend  ignorance  yrof  heirefter  and  recomends  the  samen 
to  the  magistrats  and  counsell  to  get  yr  allowance  and  ratificatione  yrto. 

The  tent  day  of  December  1672. 

Johne  Wodrow  sone  lau"  to  Ga\'ine  \\'odro\\^  workman  is  booked  prenteis  Prenteis 
w'  James  Love  hamerman  for  fyve  years  as  prenteis  and  two  years  for  meat  ^°'^'^°"'* 
and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentor  dated  the  nynt  day  of    the  sd  moneth  of 
December. 

The  same  day  Charles  Coats  is  booked  prenteis  w'  Thomas  M<^Cure  gold-  Prenteis 
smith  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentor  past  ^°^'*- 
betuixt  y™  j'ranent. 


470 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW, 


[1672 


Prenteis 
Craig. 


Prenteis 
Mortoun. 


Prenteis 
Carrick. 


Prenteis 
Wining. 


Prenteis 
KeUo. 


Prenteis 
Wining. 


Prenteis 
Miller. 


Prenteis 
Armour. 


Act  anent  the 
"Tights  and 
Ro'  Dickie 
fyned. 


14  of  December  1672. 

James  Craig  sone  to  Johne  Craig  in  AUertoun  is  booked  prenteis  with 
Johne  Johnstoun  peutherer  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meit  and  fie  sin  his 
enterie  qlk  wes  at  Mertimes  last  conforme  to  the  indentor  dated  the  first  of 
No''  1671. 

6  of  Februarij  1673. 
W™  Mortoun  is  booked  prenteis  with  Johne  Brackenrige  tailzeor  for  fyve 
years  and  two  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  14  of  No"' 
1672. 

The  same  day  \\''"  Canick  sone  [to]  Jo"  Carrick  in  Gartshore  is  booked 
as  prenteis  w'  Jo"  Carrick  weiver  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meit  and  fie  cyforme 
to  the  indentor  dated  the  ellevint  of  December  1672. 

The  same  day  James  Wining  is  booked  prenteis  with  Thomas  Wishart 
tailzeour  for  fy\"e  3-ears  and  two  for  meit  and  fie  indentor  dated  the  twentie 
sixt  day  of  November  1672. 

The  sd  day  Simeon  Kello  is  booked  prenteis  w'  Simeon  Kello  tailzeor  for 
f3'\-e  j-ears  and  two  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentor  dated  the  sext 
day  of  Februarij  1673. 

Tlirettine  of  Februarij  1673. 
The  sd  day  Robert  Wining  is  booked  prenteis  with  Patrick  Lang  weiver 
for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentor  dated  the 
ellevint  day  of  October  1672. 

The  same  day  W'"  Miller  is  booked  prenteis  with  James  Rowand  weiver 
for  fyve  years  and  two  indentor  dated  the  26  of  December  1672. 

Decimo  quinio  Februarij  1673. 

Johne  Armour  is  booked  prenteis  with  Johne  Findlay  wei\-er  for  fyve 
years  and  2  lor  meat  and  fie  indentor  dated  the  25  of  Jan^'J  1673. 

Att  Glasgow  the  sixtein  day  of  March  1673. 

The  qlk  day  Patrik  Bryce  deacon  cyveiner  of  the  sd  burgh  W™  Wallace 
Johne  Hall  late  baillies  ymi  with  the  most  pairt  of  the  deacones  of  crafts  and 
severall  of  ther  brethrein  of  counsell  being  conveined  in  Hutchesones  hospitall 
anent  the  bill  of  complent  given  in  before  y^'^  be  Alexander  Daniziell  present 
deacon  of  the  w  rights  against  Ro'  Dickie  ane  of  the  members  of  the  sd  calhng 
making  mentioune  of  his  miscariage  towardis  him  publickUe  by  caUing  him 
and  other  honest  men  of  the  tred  bot  pendicles  with  severall  other  raiUing 
vilifieing  and  threatining  expressiones  ag'  him  and  the  sd  Robert  not  being 


1673]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  471 

therwith  satisfied  did  also  in  presence  of  the  forsd  deacon  cyveiner  and  remanent 
members  abovewrin  not  regairding  y'"  most  malitiouslie  vtter  the  same  and 
continow  therin  and  said  that  ther  tred  had  nothing  to  doe  with  the  sd  deacon 
and  the  rest  of  tlie  pendicles  yrof  lyk  him  and  that  they  would  be  neill  if  they 
wanted  them  and  considering  that  the  sd  Ro'  wes  in  the  same  fault  before 
against  the  sd  deacon  three  years  since  or  therby  q"  the  sd  Alex''  wes  deacon 
and  his  iyne  past  him  at  the  requeist  and  desyre  of  the  sd  deacon  who  did 
deall  w '  James  Farie  baillie  for  the  tyme  who  had  imprisoned  him  for  y'  effect 
and  gote  him  out  of  prisone  in  hops  of  his  amendament  and  good  behaviour 
therefter  and  also  finding  y'  these  expressiounes  wer  licklie  to  mak  divisiones 
amongst  the  members  of  the  sd  tred  and  might  rander  the  most  creditable 
members  therof  contemptable  and  vncapable  of  trust  or  any  priviledge 
belonging  to  them  by  ther  chartor  albeit  many  of  them  have  borne  office  as 
deacones  and  m^s  w'  als  mutch  credite  and  approbatione  as  any  of  the  other 
members  of  tlier  tred  and  lykw  ayes  finding  that  the  sd  Ro'  Dickie  hes  provine 
incorigible  and  that  ther  ar  serall  acts  both  in  the  deacon  cyveiners  book  and 
the  crafts  owne  book  ag*^  him  the  sd  deacon  cyveiner  and  remanent  members 
forsd  all  with  ane  consent  doe  ratiffie  and  approve  the  forsds  acts  and  ordanes 
the  same  to  be  pute  to  executione  and  fynes  the  sd  Robert  Dickie  in  the  soume 
of  tuentie  merks  scots  and  decernes  and  ordanes  him  to  pay  the  samen  to  the 
deacon  cy\'einers  collector  for  the  \'se  of  the  poore  for  his  sd  miscariage  and 
declares  heirby  y'  the  sd  Ro'  sail  never  have  any  office  in  the  sd  tred  or  any 
place  of  trust  or  voyce  therin  heirefter  and  sicklyk  proheibits  and  discharges 
anj'  of  the  members  of  the  sd  calhng  directhe  or  indirectlie  to  call  any  of  the 
members  of  ther  calling  pendicles  or  vse  any  vilifieing  expressiones  ag'  y'" 
vnder  the  paine  of  fyve  pounds  scots  to  be  payed  for  the  vse  of  the  poore  of 
the  sd  tred  with  fourtie  shilling  scots  to  the  baillies  of  the  sd  burgh  toties 
quoties  and  the  contraveiners  ar  heirby  declared  vncapable  of  all  trust  office 
or  priviledge  within  the  same  by  and  attour  the  sd  fyne  and  ordanes  thir 
pnts  to  be  intimat  to  the  sd  tred  at  ther  first  meiting  y'  non  pretend  ignorance 
and  to  be  verbatim  insert  in  ther  books  and  observed  as  ane  act  inviolable  in 
tyme  comeing. 

Glasgow  the  twentie  ane  day  of  Apryle  1673. 

James  Morisoune  sone  to  Ro'  Morisoune  is  booked  prenteis  w'  Johne  Prenteis 
Loch  elder  weiver  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the 
indentor  dated  the  27  of  Apryle  1671. 


Morisone. 


Primo  Mai]  1673. 
Archibald  Tod  is  booked   prenteis  w'  Tho.  Kessane  weiver  for  fyve  years  Prenteis  Tod. 
and  two  for  meit  and  fie  indentour  dated  the  twentie  eight  of  October  1672. 

The  sd  day  W"'  Smith  sone  to  James  Smith  mer*"  is  booked  prenteis  w'  Prenteis 
Ro*  Roger  tailzeor  for  fyve  year  and  2  indentor  dated  the  elevint  of  Februarij  last.    ™'    ' 


472 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1673 


DesjTe  to  be 
presented  to 
the  counsell 
anent  the 
archbishop. 


and  Wodrow.  jj^e  same  day  Francis  Wodrow  sone  to  Jo"  Wodrow  mer**  is  booked  prenteis 

vv'  Johne  \\'atsone  tailzeor  for  5  year  and  2  indentor  dated  the  25  of  Apryle 
last. 

Ait  Glasgow  tlie  second  day  of  May  1673. 

The  qlk  day  being  conveined  in  the  crafts  hospitall  James  Farie  ane  of 
the  present  baillies  of  the  sd  burgh  Patrick  Bryce  deacon  cv-\"einer  of  the  samen 
\\'iniam  Wallace  and  Jo°  Hall  late  baillies  yrof  with  the  deacones  of  crafts 
and  ther  brethrein  of  counsell  with  ane  great  number  of  the  remanent  crafts 
vv'in  this  burgh  and  being  informed  that  the  archbishop  of  Glasgow  his  grace 
being  now  att  London  is  of  intentione  to  dimitt  his  place  and  charge  as  arch- 
bishop and  thej'  fearing  if  his  dimissione  be  taken  aff  his  hand  the  same  may 
tend  to  the  disquyet  of  this  burgh  and  prejudice  of  the  inhabitants  therin 
the}'  having  leaved  peceablie  and  quyetlie  since  the  sd  archbishop  his  comeing 
heir  throw  his  christiane  cariage  and  beha\iour  towards  y™  and  the  fomamed 
psones  having  takin  the  same  to  ther  consideratione  they  doe  heirby  eamestlie 
and  humblie  desyre  the  proveist  baillies  and  counsell  of  the  sd  burgh  to  recomend 
the  same  to  q'  psones  at  court  they  think  most  fitting  and  in  particular  to  the 
Duke  of  Lauderdaill  his  grace  to  deall  with  the  sd  archbishop  that  he  may 
not  dimitt  and  y'  his  grace  may  be  pleased  to  deall  w'  his  ma"''  not  to  accept 
of  the  sd  dimissione  aff  the  sd  archbishop  hands  bot  to  desyre  him  to  com 
bak  and  continow  in  his  charg  qlk  will  be  both  satisfactorie  and  beneficiall  to 
this  burgh  and  cuntrey  about  and  appo\Tits  this  ther  desyre  to  be  presented 
to  the  sds  magistrats  and  counsell  be  the  deacones  of  tailzeors  skiners  and 
Wrights  or  any  two  of  them. 

Decimo  quinto  Maij  1673. 

W'illiam  Stevine  is  booked  prenteis  w'  Ro'  Flaikfeild  wei\'er  for  fyve  years 
and  two  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  16  of  Ja""''  last. 

Decimo  sexto  Maij  1673. 
Conveined  the  deacon  cyveiner  W™  W  allace  late   baillie  with 
the  present  deacones  and  the  most  pairt  of  the  last  years  deacones 
w*  Jo"  \\'odrop  jT  collector  and  several!  of  yr  bretherine  of  counsell. 

Fultoun  The  sd  day  appoynts  Johne  Fultoun  to  be  placed  in  that  vaicant  place 

t'he'oid  menia  ^  the  crafts  hospitall  as  ane  of  the  old  men  yrin  and  to  get  his  pensione  as  the 
the  ho\ise.         ^est  of  the  old  men  does. 


Prenteis 
Stevine. 


Ratificatione 
of  ane  act  in 
favors  of  the 
weiveris. 


The  sd  day  anent  the  suplicatione  presented  to  the  sd  deacon  cyveiner 
and  remanent  psones  forsd  be  Johne  Patersone  present  deacon  of  the  weivers 
for  himselfe  and  in  name  of  the  rest  of  yr  calhng  craving  ane  act  to  be  ratiffied 
and  aproven  be  y""  qrof  the  tennor  foUowes.  Att  Glasgow  the  second  day  of 
May  1673.  The  qlk  daj-  Johne  Patersone  present  deacon  of  the  weivers  of 
the  sd  burgh  his  m's  and  remanent  brethrine  of  the  sd  vocatioune  being 


1673]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW  .  473 

conveined  (who  for  the  most  pairt  being  present)  and  considering  the  great  want 
of  wark  amongst  the  most  pairt  of  ther  friemen  occasioned  by  the  multitude 
and  number  of  strangers  entering  friemen  with  them  be  reasoune  of  the  smahies 
of  the  friedome  fj'ne  payed  to  the  tred  at  ther  enterie  qlk  is  lyk  to  pute  to 
mine  many  of  ther  friemen  and  ther  families  and  renders  them  burdinsome 
to  the  calling  for  remeid  qrof  efter  serious  consideratione  had  be  them  theranent 
the  sd  deacon  m^s  and  remanent  brethrein  of  the  said  calling  vnanimouslie 
in  on  voice  did  inact  statute  and  ordaine  and  heirby  inacts  statuts  and  ordaines 
that  all  strangers  entering  friemen  with  the  said  tred  in  all  tyme  heirefter  who 
comes  in  at  the  farr  hand  and  buyes  ther  friedome  sail  pay  at  his  enterie  the 
soume  of  four  score  pounds  scots  money  of  friedome  fyne  without  any  diminu- 
tioune  or  modifica'une  be  the  deacon  and  m'"s  of  the  sd  tred  or  ther  successors 
in  office  and  that  by  and  attour  the  other  casualities  and  services  forme'.lie  in 
vse  to  be  done  and  payed  be  them  at  ther  enterie  recomending  the  samen  to 
the  sd  deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones  and  ther  brethrine  of  counsell  for  ther 
approba-ne  and  ratifftca'ne  yrof  qlk  act  abovewrin  being  considered  be  the 
sd  deacon  cyveiner  and  remanent  psones  forsd  they  have  ratiffied  and  approven 
and  be  thir  pnts  ratiffies  and  approves  of  the  sd  act  in  the  haill  heids  and 
articles  therof  and  ordaines  ther  clerk  to  registrat  the  sd  act  and  this  pnt 
ratiffica-une  yrof  in  the  cyveiners  book  and  to  give  out  ane  extract  yrof  to  the 
sd  calUng  and  that  the  samen  be  intimat  to  the  haill  calling  y'  non  pretend 
ignorance  yrof. 

Glasgow  the  ellevinl  day  of  J ulij  1673. 

Johne  Hill  sone  to  Robert  Hill  in  Meikle  Govane  is  booked  prenteis  w'  Prenteis  Hill. 
M''  David  Sharp  apothecarie  for  sevine  years  conforme  to  the  indentor  dated 
the  penult  of  May  1672. 

18  0/  J  ulij  1673.  » 

Johne  Park  is  booked  prenteis  with  James  Ker  hamerman  for  fyve  years  Prenteis  Park, 
and  two  for  meat  and  fie  indentor  dated  the  twentie  ane  day  of  Junij  1673. 

26  of  J  ulij  1673. 
The  sd  day  W™  Baxter  sone  to  Johne  Baxter  in  Kepoch  is  booked  prenteis  Prenteis 
with  Archbald  Bogle  chirurgiane  for  sevine  years  conforme  to  the  indentor 
dated  the  tent  day  of  Junij  1673. 


Baxter. 


Eight  day  of  August  1673. 
Robert  Frame  is  booked  prenteis  w^  Johne  Brackenrige  tailzeor  for  fyve  Prenteis 
years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentor  date  the  last  of  Juhj  1673. 


Frame. 


The  same  day  W™  Crichtoun  is  booked  prenteis  w*  W'"  Reid  tailzeor  for  rreuteis 
fyve  years  and  two  for  meit  and  fie  cyforme  to  yr  indentor  dated  the  23  of  ^"'^'''°'^''- 
Junij  last. 


474 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1673 


Prenteis 
Bogle. 


The  said  day  Johne  Bogle  sone  to  \\"™  Bogle  mess''  is  booked  as  he  who 
wes  bund  prenteis  to  Alex''  Adame  tailzeor  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat 
and  fie  sin  his  enterie  qlk  wes  at  Lambes  1668  conforme  to  the  indentor  dated 
the  twentie  sevint  of  August  1668  years. 


Prenteis 
Stewart. 


Prenteis 
Rankine. 


14  of  August  l-dy^i- 

Allan  Stewart  is  booked  prenteis  with  Andrew  Lang  weiver  conforme  to 
the  indentor  made  betuixt  y"". 

The  said  day  James  Rankine  is  booked  prenteis  w'  James  Andersone 
maltman  conforme  to  the  indentor  made  betuixt  y"". 


Extent 
GorbaU  rent 
the  cropt 
1672. 


Vigesimo  iwno  August]  1673. 

The  sd  day  the  deacon  cy\'einer  w'  'W'"  Wallace  the  deacones  of  crafts 
and  these  who  wer  deacones  the  last  year  for  the  most  parrt  being  present 
and  serall  others  of  the  brethrine  of  counsell  being  conveined  in  Hutchesones 
hospitall  for  casting  the  Gorball  rent  the  cropt  1672  they  did  find  the  haill 
rent  the  sd  year  conforme  to  the  fear  at  fyve  pound  the  boll  with  the  crafts 
pairt  of  the  teynds  the  sd  year  ther  pairt  of  the  minister  of  Govanes  stipend 
being  payed  extend  to  in  haill  to  the  soume  of  eight  hundreth  sixtie  three  pound 
qlk  being  divyded  in  threttie  ane  pairts  ther  falls  for  ilk  thousand  merks 
twentie  sevine  pound  sixtein  shilling  eight  pennies  qlk  the  collector  is  appoynted 
to  pay  to  the  reptive  treds  conforme  to  ther  proportiones. 


Prenteis 
Loiike. 


13  of  September  1673. 

George  Louke  sone  to  George  Louk  mer**  in  Glasgow  is  booked  prenteis 
with  Ro'  Brock  goldsmith  for  fyve  years  and  two  conforme  to  the  indentor 
dated  the  twentie  two  day  of  August  1673. 


Lyte  deacon 
cyveiner. 


Bryce 
cytinowed 
deacon 
cyveiner. 


Glasgow  the  eight  day  of  October  1673. 

The  sd  day  Johne  Hall  bailhe  with  Patrick  Brjxe  deacon  cyveiner  and 
the  deacones  of  crafts  with  ther  brethrine  of  counsell  being  conveined  for 
electing  two  of  ther  number  to  be  presented  with  the  present  deacon  con- 
veiner  to  the  proveist  baiUies  and  counsell  of  this  burgh  and  oy''s  conveined 
to  the  effect  they  may  make  choyse  of  ane  of  y'"  to  be  deacon  cyveiner  for 
the  year  enshewing  be  pluralitie  of  vots  James  Farie  and  Wilham  Wallace 
wer  choysen  to  the  effect  forsd  and  appoynts  the  lyte  to  be  presented  be  the 
deacones  of  hamermen  and  chirurgianes. 

The  same  day  Patrick  Br3-ce  wes  continoued  deacon  cyveiner  for  ane  year 
to  come. 


1 


1673]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW, 


475 


Nynl  of  October  1673. 

Followes   the    names   of  those   ivho   ar   choysen   to  be  on  the  deacon 
cyveiners  counsell  for  the  year  enshcwing  and  first  the  deacones. 


W"'  Grahame 
Johne  Dalrymple 
James  Hutchesone 
James  Maissone 
Robert  Flaikfield 


Johne  Findlay 
W™  Govane 
Mr  David  Sharp 
Ro'  Boyd 
Johne  Watsone 
Niniane  Spence 
W™  Hutchesone 


Hamermen 


James  Farie 
Alex''  Govane 
Johne  Leiper 
W"  Philp 
Patrick  M^Ilvicar 


Maltmen 


W"i  Wallace 
Johne  Bryssoune 
Johne  Robiesone 
Johne  Park 
Mathow  M^Aulav 


Tailzeours 


W"  Watsone 
Simeon  Tennent 
Androw  Scot 
Johne  Gilchreist 
Ro'  Thomsone 


Skiners 


Chirurgianes 


Ro*  Bogle 
Johne  Padie 

W  Charles  Mowat 
Ar''  Bogle 


Cordouners 


Baxters 


Johne  Wood 
James  Thomsone 
Johne  Listoun 
Johne  Wodrop 
Wm  Watsone 

W'm  Glen 
Johne  Scot 


Cowpers 


Maissones 


Fleshours 


James  Smith 
Niniane  Patersone 

Johne  Clark 

Tho.  Cauldwell  yo'' 

James  Giknour 
Johne  Barrie 


Weivers 


Patrick  Bryce 
Johne  Patersone 
Johne  Flaikfeild 


Bonetmakers    Johne  Walker 

Gairdiners         Ro'  Tennent 

George  Ralstoun 


The  said  day  the  haill  fornamed  persones  gave  ther  oathes  to  be  faithfull 
counsellours  to  the  deacon  cyveiner  for  ane  year  to  come  except  James  Colhoun 
Androw  Scot  James  Watsone  Jo"  Barrie  James  Watsone  and  James  Gilmour 
Johne  Listoun  Jo"  Walker  and  George  Ralstoun  who  wer  absent. 


476  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1673 

Persones  The  Same  day  the  fomamed  peisones  who  war  present  and  gave  ther 

w'  the  dean  of  oathes  being  also  conveined  for  choysing  four  of  ther  number  to  be  on  the  dean 

^^'  of  gilds  court  for  the  year  enshewing  be  plurahtie  of  votts  James  Farie  W" 

\\'allace  James  Colhoun  and  Simeon  Tennent  wer  choysen  to  the  effect  forsd 

and  appojTits  the  deacon  cj''\'einer  to  present  them  as  \'se  is. 

Ellevint  of  November  1673. 

Prenteis  James  Alexander  is  booked  prenteis  with  Johne  Loch  yo''  for  fyve  years 

and  two  conforme  to  the  indentor  dated  the  twentie  two  of  October  1673. 

Thrcttine  of  November  1673. 

The  same  day  Johne  Hall  bailhe  the  deacon  cyvetner  with  W™  Wallace 
and  the  deacones  of  crafts  w'  ther  brethrine  of  counsell  being  cyveined  in  the 
crafts  hospitaU  for  making  of  Jo"  Wodrop  collector  his  compt  of  his  intro- 
missione  w*  the  rent  belonging  to  the  house  the  last  year  qrof  charge  and 
discharge  foUowes  and  first  the  charge. 

Charge. 

Imprimis  the  compter  charges  himselfe  with  q'  he  receaved  fra 
]\Iathow  M^^Aulay  last  collector  y'  remained  in  his  hands  at 
his    last   compt    making        .....     332     6     8 

Item  with  q'  he  receaved  of  burges  money  .  .  .       29  iS     o 

Item  fra  Johne  Jonstoun  of  bucket  money         .  .     135    o    o 

Item  fra  James  Bryce  of  the  ground  anweUs  he  collected  .       28     6     4 

Item  with  threttie  pound  he  receaved  fra  'Sl^  Av^  iFClaine  for 
ane  high  house  of  James  Duncanes  land  fra  W'itsonday  1672 
to  Wit.  1673  and  with  twentie  two  pound  receaved  fra  James 
Bowie  for  ane  laich  house  therof  the  sd  year     inde  .       52     0     o 

Item  with  the  maill  of  the  house  belonging  to  the  hospitall  possest 

be  Androw  Clark  the  sd  year  is       .  .  .  .       29     0     o 

Item  receaved  fra  Johne  Adame  for  the  rent  of  the  yaird  belonging 

to  the  hospitall  the  sd  year  .  .  .  .       16     o     o 

Item  fra  Alexander  Govane  for  ane  years  arent  of  ane  hundreth 

merks  fra  Mertimes  1671  to  Mert.  1672       .  .  .400 

Item  fra  Johne  \\'allace  for  ane  years  arent  of  ane  hundreth  merks 

fra  Michaelmes  1671  to  1672  .  .  .  .       40    o    o 

Item  with  ane  years  arent  of  300  merks  receaved  fra  Hugh  Corbet 

fra  Mertimes  1671  to  ]\Ier.  1672     is    .  .  .  .       12     o     o 

Item  receaved  fra  Ar*"  Stewart  for  ane  years  arent  of  650  merks 

the  sd  year  .  .  .  .  .  .       26    o    0 

Item  fra  Johne  Findlay  for  the  arent  of  ane  thousand  merks  the 

sd  year  .  .  .  •  •  •  .       40    o    0 


1673]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  477 

Item  fra  Androw  Morsoune  for  ane  year  and  halfe  years  arent  of 

400  m  fra  Mertimes  1671  to  Witsonday  1673  .  .       22  13    4 

Item  fra  James  Man  for  ane  years  arent  of  100  ti  fra  Witsonday 

1672  to  Witsonday  1673       .  .  .  .  .         5  10     o 

Item  for  ane  year  and  ane  quarters  arent  of  fyve  hundreth  merks 

resting  be  v/  Jo"  Neisbit  fra  Witsonday  1672  to  Lambes  last       22  10     0 
Item  fra  Ardincaple  for  ane  years  arent  of  500  merks  fra  Wit- 
sonday 1672  to  Wit.  1673      .  .  .  .  .       18     6     8 
Item  fra  Johne  Corse  for  ane  years  arent  of  600  ni  fra  Mertimes 

1671  to  Mer.  1672     .  .  .  .  .  .       24     o     o 

Item  fra  \\'"'  Andersone  for  ane  years  arent  of  500  merks  fra 

Witsonday  1672  to  Witsonday  1673  .  .  .       18    6    8 

Item  fra  Thomas  Shearer  for  ane  years  arent  of  300  merkes  fra 

Mertimes  1671   to  Mer.   1672  .  .  .  .       12     o     o 

Item  fra  George  Herbertsone  qlk  wes  owing  to  the  house  be  v/ 

Johne  Neisbit  and  his  caul's  be  band  .  .  .     333     6    8 

Item   receaved  fra   the  liaill  deacones  conforme   to   the  reptive 

proportiones  for  suplie  of  the  house 
Item  receaved  fra  M^  Ro*  Napier  for  his  gildrie  fyne 
Item  fra  Androw  Craig  as  ane  pairt  of  his  gildrie  fyne    . 
Item  fra  W"  Mershell  as  ane  pairt  of  his  gildrie  fyne 
Item  fra  Ro*^  Aikinheid  qlk  wes  resting  of  his  gildrie  fyne 
Item  fra  James  Pollock  for  his  gildrie  fyne 
Item  fra  Ro'  Park  for  his  gildrie  fyne     .... 
Item  fra  Jo"  Hodge  as  ane  pairt  of  his  gildrie  fyne 
Item  fra  Androw  Mainie  for  his  fyne       .... 
Item  fra  Walter  M'^Alaster  as  ane  pairt  of  his  fyne 
Item  fra  Malcome  Hendrie  for  his  gildrie  fyne     . 
Item  fra  Ro'  Campbell  for  his  gildrie  fyne 
Item  fra  Jo"  Gilespie  as  ane  pairt  of  his  fyne 
Item  fra  W"'  Lidell  as  ane  pairt  of  his  gildrie  fyne 
Item  fra  James  Davidsone  as  ane  pairt  of  his  fyne 
Item  fra  Jo"  Campbell  for  his  fyne         .... 
Item  receaved  fra  the  deacones  of  tailzeors  weivers  and  cowpers 

at  8  li  each  of  y"'  is 
Item  the  house  pairt  of  the  Gorball  rent  the  last  year 
Item  receaved  of  ground  anuells  for  the  year  1672 
Item  fra  Jo"  Hall  for  the  ground  an  walls  of  his  land  in  Drygate 

for  the  years  1668,  69,  70  and  1671 
Item  for  Hendrie  Wats  land  the  year  1671 
Item  for  W"'  Shawes  land  the  sd  year    .... 

Suma  of  the  charge  is       .  .  .  .  2793  17    4 


209 

13 

4 

100 

0 

0 

80 

0 

0 

33 

6 

8 

33 

6 

8 

100 

0 

0 

100 

0 

0 

50 

0 

0 

100 

0 

0 

50 

0 

0 

100 

0 

0 

100 

0 

0 

20 

0 

0 

66 

13 

4 

48 

0 

0 

100 

0 

0 

24 

0 

0 

222 

13 

4 

61 

9 

4 

3 

4 

0 

0 

3 

0 

0 

3 

0 

478 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1673 


18 

0 

0 

8 

0 

0 

0 

12 

0 

4 

0 

0 

8 

0 

0 

8 

0 

0 

3 

0 

0 

61 

8 

8 

Discharge. 
Imprimis  deburst  to  the  severall  poore  of  the  reptive  crafts  con- 
forme  to  the  list  set  doune  be  warrand  dated  23  No''  1672     .     216     6     o 
Item  deburst  be  ordour  of  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones  to 
Jo°  Edglie  Jo"  Falconer  and  ane  other  distrest  man  for  yr 
supUe  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       15  14     o 

Item  be  the  same  ordour  to  \\'alter  Crafourd  tailzeor  Androw 
Morisoune  and  Jo"  Pettigrew  .... 

Item  given  to  the  off''        ...... 

Item  to  Geo.  Pollock       ...... 

Item    to    Ro*    Smellie    be    ordour   of   the   deacon    cyveiner  and 
deacones        ....... 

Item  to  Ro'  .\ndersone  to  buy  ane  coat  be  the  same  ordour 
Item  be  the  sd  ordour  to  Johne  Caulduell  for  his  supUe    . 
Item  to  James  Bryce  mess""  for  service  done  for  the  sd  hospitall 
Item  deburst  to  Robert  Boj^d  for  building  the  hospitall  stair  and 
othenvays    depurst    yranent    conforme     to     the    particular 
accompt  gi\-en  in  \'ranent     ..... 

Item  deburst  for  repairing  of  v/  James  Duncanes  houss  conforme 

to  the  particular  accompt     .  .  .  .  .       33  19     8 

Item  deburst  to  the  six  old  men  in  the  house  for  ane  year  fra  the 

15  of  December  1672  to  the  15  De.  1673       .  .  .     288     o     o 

Item  lor  six  pair  of  shoes  to  y"'  at  30s.  the  pair  is  .  .900 

Item  for  elevine  monethes  coales  to  y"  each  moneth  30s.         .       16  10    o 
For  twelve  shirts  to  y"'  ilk  shirt  23s.  4d.  is  .  .  .       14     o     o 

Item  deburst  for  four  elnes  and  halfe  ane  elne  of  cloath  to  be  ane 
cloak  to  Androw  Jape  at  2  ti  ilk  elne  and  for  furnishing  and 
making  yrof     is        .  .  .  .  .  .         9  19     o 

Item  for  ane  cloak  to  Gilbert  Hall  .  .  .  .         4     6  10 

Item  for  mending  of  some  holls  in  the  hospitall  roofe       .  .         o  12     o 

Item  to  the  clerks  for  yr  fiells      .  .  .  .  .       26  13     4 

Item  for  the  compters  owne  fiell  .  .  .  .       24     o     o 

Item  to  the  officer  for  his  fiell      .  .  .  .  .       20     0     o 

Item  deburst  for  registra*ne  of  ane  band  against  Johne  Sheills 
and  raiseing  Ires  of  horning  poynding  inhibitione  and  captione 
yron  against  him       .  .  .  .  .  .860 

Item  deburst  to  several  poore  persones  be  the  deacon  cyveiners 

ordour  the  last  year  conforme  to  the  compt  yrof       .  •       53     5     4 

Item  lent  to  the  Laird  of  .\rdincaple  wpon  band  .  .     400     o     o 

Item  lent  to  W™  Thomsone  wpon  his  band         .  .  .     400     o     o 

Item  lent  to  James  Warden  wpon  band  .  .  .     200     o     o 

.   1918     3     6 


Suiiia  of  the  discharge  is 


1673]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  479 

Qlk  compt  abovewrin  being  red  calculat  and  laid  they  find  the  charge 
to  exceid  the  discharge  the  soume  of  eight  hundreth  seavintie  fyve  pound 
threttine  shiUing  ten  pennies  qlk  the  compter  is  appoynted  to  pay  in  and  ther- 
fore  he  is  discharged  of  his  haill  intromissioune  he  payand  the  sd  soume  as 
sd  is  be  thir  pnts  for  now  and  ever. 

The  same  day  be  pluralitie  of  vots  Jo"  Wodrop  wes  continoued  collector  Wodrop 

^  ,  ,  ,  •  ,,  continoued 

for  ane  year  to  come  who  gave  his  oath.  collector. 

The  sd  day  the  sd  Jo"  Wodrop  colector  produced  of  400  merks  qlk  is  Bands 
resting  to  the  house  be  Androw  Morsoune  w'  severall  persones  as  cau''s  yrin  ^1°  collector 
Item  he  produced  ane  band  granted  be  Ardincaple  and  his  caul's  for  the  400  ll  andputem 
he  hes  discharged  himself  w'  bearing  arent  fra  Lambes  last   Item  ane  band 
granted  be  W'"  Wairden  and  his  caul's  bearing  arent  fra  Lambes  last  of  200  I1 
Item  ane  other  band  of  400  ti  bearing  arent  fra  the  sd  terme  granted  to  the 
house  be  W™  Wairden  in  Auchinairne  and  his  caul's  qlk  wer  all  pute  in  the  box. 


The  same  day  ther  wes  produced  of  burges  silver  and  gi\'en  to  the  collector  Money  given 
urges  silver  threttie  eight  pound  thr 
he  is  to  be  charged  at  his  compt  making. 


of  burges  silver  threttie  eight  pound  threttine  shilling  four  pennies  wherwith  collector, 


Att  Glasgow  the  fyftein  day  of  November  1673. 
The  sd  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  Johne  Hall,  baillie,  W"'  Wallace  with  Warrand 
the  present  deacones  of  crafts  and  these  who  wer  deacones  the  last  year  who 
wer  present  for  the  most  pairt  with  some  others  of  ther  brethrein  of  counsell 
they  ordaine  Johne  Wodrop  yr  collector  to  distribute  amongst  the  poore  of 
the  reptive  treds  conforme  to  the  list  set  doune  yranent  for  ther  help  and 
supplie  the  soume  of  three  hundreth  ten  pound  four  shilling  scots  money  qlk 
soume  is  to  be  allowed  to  the  sd  Jo"  at  his  compt  making. 

Glasgow  the  ellevint  day  of  December  1673. 
The  sd  day  being  conveined  in  the  crafts  hospitall  Johne  Hall  baillie  Ventiresait. 
the  deacon  cyveiner  w'  James  Farie  James  Colhoun  W™  Wallace  late  baillies 
with  the  deacones  of  crafts  and  the  brethrine  of  counsell  anent  ane  ships 
loadeing  of  venter  salt  lying  at  Port  Glasgow  and  made  offer  of  at  eight  pound 
scots  the  watter  boll  they  receavers  payand  all  customes  excyse  and  other 
dewes  and  receaving  the  same  aff  the  tackle  at  the  ship  syd  it  wes  concluded 
be  pluralitie  of  vots  that  the  crafts  sould  take  yr  halfe  of  the  sd  salt  for  the 
behove  of  ther  hospitall.  Therefter  it  wes  agreed  wpon  be  the  fornamed 
persones  that  they  would  quat  the  samen  to  any  persone  who  would  give  most 
for  ther  pairt  of  the  bargane  for  the  vse  of  the  poore  of  the  house  and  appoynts 
the  samen  to  be  rowped  publictlie  the  morrow  at  Hutchesones  hospitall  and 
the  deacon  cyveiner  with  the  crafts  baillie  and  the  deacones  with  the  last  years 
deacones  with  sutch  of  yr  brethrine  of  counsell  as  sould  please  to  be  present 
yrat. 


480 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1673 


Ventir  salt 
rott-ped. 


Prenteis 
Walker. 


Prenteis 
.M'Laine. 


Prenteis 
Mortoun. 


Present  a  ~  use 
Robiesone. 


Complent 
ag'  Gray. 


Prenteis 
Wood. 


12  0/  December  1673. 
The  sd  day  being  conveined  in  Hutchesones  hospital!  the  deacon  cyveiner 
BaiUie  Hall  «'  the  deacones  of  crafts  and  serall  of  yr  brethrein  of  counsell 
anent  the  rowping  of  the  sd  salt  and  efter  lau"  rowping  yrof  the}'  quate  ther 
pairt  of  the  samen  to  \V"'  Wallace  late  baillie  for  paj-'  of  fourscore  ten  punds 
scots  to  be  payed  the  collector  of  the  crafts  hospitall  for  the  vse  of  ther  poore 
it  being  the  most  that  wes  bidden  be  any  persone  therfore. 

9  /"'■'■'  1674. 
Gabriell  Walker  is  booked  prenteis  v\t  Ro*  Walker  hamerman  his  broy'' 
for  5  years  and  2  for  meat  and  fie  indentor  dated  the  tuentie  fourt  of  December 

last. 

10  of  Jan">  1674. 

Hugh  M'^Claine  sone  to  Dougall  M'^Laine  in  Cowall  is  booked  prenteis 
w'  Jo°  Barrie  fleshour  for  7  3'ears  conforme  to  the  indentor  dated  the  ellevint 
day  of  Februarij  1671. 

6  of  Feb^i  1674. 
James  Mortoun   is   booked   prenteis  and  servand   to  Androw   Ratladge 
hatemaker  for  5  years  and  2  for  meat  and  fie  indentor  dated  the  thrid  of  May 
1671. 

Glasgow  twelfe  day  of  Feb''^  1674. 
The  sd  da}-  the  deacon  cyveiner  w'  the  deacones  of  crafts  w*  the  most  pairt 
of  the  last  years  deacones  being  convened  \v'  some  other  of  yr  brethrine  of 
counsell  they  grant  ane  presenta~une  to  W™  Robiesone  sone  to  Jo"  Robiesone 
malt,  to  3''  bursars  place  of  philosophie  in  the  coUedge  at  the  crafts  pre- 
senta-une  qlk  wes  given  before  to  Mathow  Wilsones  sone. 

The  said  day  David  Gray  ane  of  the  old  men  in  the  crafts  house  being 
compleined  on  be  the  rest  of  the  old  men  yrin  for  his  abuseing  of  them  and 
railling  against  y""  qlk  he  confesed  it  wes  concluded  y'  if  ever  he  wer  found 
to  doe  the  lyke  heirefter  he  wes  to  be  pute  out  of  the  house  and  have  no  benefite 
yrby  and  never  be  admitted  yrin  againe  qrvnto  he  himself  consented. 

18  Felfii  1674. 
The  sd  day  Gavine  Wood  is  booked  prenteis  as  he  who  served  James 
Davidsone  tailzeor  for  sevine  years  conforme  to  the  indentor  dated  the  twentie 
two  day  of  Apryle  1665. 


Decimo  Marti j  1674. 
Lang  prenteis.  The  sd  day  Walter  Lang  sone  to  James  Lang  in  Blaquhaime  is  booked 

prenteis  with  James  Watsone  fleshour  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meit  and 
fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  eighteen  day  of  Junij  1673. 


1674]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  481; 

Nyntein  of  March  1674. 

The  said  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  deacones  of  hamermen  tailzeors  cordouners  20  lib.  grant 
baxters    wrights   maissounes   cowpers    bonetmakers   and   Johne    Wodrop   yr 
collector  being  conveined  they  appoynt  Johne  Wodrop  collector  to  give  doune 
to  (  )  Lidell  Wright  twentic  pounds  scots  of  his  gildrie  fyne  for  qlk  he 

gave  band  in  respect  his  band  wes  taken  for  the  sd  twentie  pounds  more  y" 
others  payes  for  ther  gildrie  fyne  and  y'  it  wes  promist  him  doune. 

24  of  March  1674. 

W""  Broun  sone  to  W"i  Broun  maltman  is  booked  as  prenteis  w'  Johne  Prenteis 
Robiesone  yo""  hamerman  for  sevine  years  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated 
the  twentie  eight  day  of  Jan'''J  1674. 


Broun. 


Att  Glasgow  the  first  day  of  Apryle  1674. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones  of  crafts  being  conveined  Act  in  favors 
in  Hutchesones  hospitall  anent  ane  complaint  given  in  to  them  be  the  deacone  cowpers. 
of  cowpers  and  severall  others  of  ther  tred  against  W"'  Sheills  Johne  Scot  and 
Johne  Neisbit  three  of  ther  incorporatioune  m_aking  mentioune  that  by  serall 
actis  of  ther  owne  tred  and  in  particular  by  ane  act  of  Walter  Neilsone  then 
deacon  cyveiner  and  his  brethrein  dated  the  eightein  day  of  November  1665 
it  is  statute  and  ordained  that  q^somever  bargane  of  rungs  steps  staves  splits 
and  others  concerning  the  sd  tred  of  cowpers  sail  be  bought  be  the  deacone 
then  present  and  to  come  of  the  sd  tred  or  be  any  other  member  therof  from 
any  burges  of  this  burgh  or  from  any  stranger  or  other  persone  or  psones 
q'somever  sould  be  comoun  for  the  haill  tred  proportionallie  amongst  y"^ 
they  paying  for  the  same  at  the  receapt  therof  otherwayes  the  transgressors 
to  have  no  benefite  therof  conforme  to  the  sds  acts  notwithstanding  qrof  the 
saids  W"  Sheills  Johne  Scot  and  Johne  Neisbit  hes  bought  ane  bargane  of 
rungs  qlk  they  refuise  to  make  any  treds  bargane  bot  intends  to  make  vse 
therof  for  ther  own  particular  behoves  cravand  therfore  the  sd  deacon  cyveiner 
and  deacones  to  decerne  and  ordane  the  sds  thre  persones  to  divyd  and  delj'ver 
to  the  remanent  of  the  sd  tred  ther  pairts  proportionallie  of  the  sds  rungs 
conforme  to  vse  and  wont  and  of  the  former  acts  set  doune  theranent  as  also 
to  ratiffie  and  approve  the  saids  acts  and  make  the  same  mor  clear  to  the  effect 
the  samen  may  be  observed  vnviolable  in  tyme  comeing  as  the  sd  desyre  and 
complent  bears  qlk  being  taken  to  the  said  deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones 
ther  consideratione  they  ordaned  and  heirby  ordanes  the  saids  W"'  Sheills 
Johne  Scot  and  Jo"  Neisbit  to  deliver  to  the  sd  deacon  and  remanent  members 
of  ther  tred  the  equall  halfe  of  the  sd  bargane  of  rungs  at  the  rate  they  bought 
them  they  paying  the  equall  halfe  of  the  charges  the  sds  psones  wes  at  in  buying 
of  them  and  that  they  appropriat  the  other  halfe  yrof  for  ther  owne  vse  and 
behove  and  farder  it  is  heirby  declared  be  the  sd  deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones 

2G 


482 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1674 


that  any  of  the  sd  tred  of  cowpers  who  pleases  sail  have  libertie  in  tjrme  comeing 
to  repair  to  the  cuntrey  for  buying  of  rungs  steps  staves  splits  or  others 
concerning  ther  imploj'ment  and  to  apply  the  same  to  ther  owne  vse  and  behove 
without  consent  of  the  deacon  and  remanent  of  ther  brethrein  if  the  sd  deacon 
and  remanent  of  the  brethrein  or  members  refuise  to  joyne  with  y""  the  sds 
persone  or  persones  intimating  the  same  to  the  sd  deacon  and  requyre  him  for 
himselfe  and  in  name  of  the  haill  tred  to  joyne  w'  them  for  y'  effect  tuentie 
four  houres  before  ther  goeing  excepting  furth  heirof  any  rungs  splits  or  others 
that  shall  be  water  borne  betuixt  this  burgh  and  the  Cloch  comeing  heir  to  be 
sold  or  that  growes  w'in  six  mylnes  to  this  toun  declairing  the  same  to  belong 
to  the  haill  tred  proportionallie  altho  they  shall  happen  to  be  bought  by  any 
particular  member  therof  and  ordanes  thir  presents  to  be  observed  be  the  sd 
tred  of  cowpers  in  all  tyme  comeing  and  to  be  intimat  to  them  at  ther  first 
meiting  y'  non  pretend  ignorance  and  booked  in  ther  owne  book. 


Prenteis 
Hadoway. 


Currie 
Prenteis. 


Act  against 
J  ohne  Corse. 


Glasgow  the  first  day  oj  May  1674. 

The  sd  day  William  Hadoway  is  booked  prenteis  with  Ar"*  Hadoway 
weiver  for  fj've  years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated 
the  threttine  day  of  Januarij  1673. 

4  of  May  1674. 

The  said  daj^  Allan  Currie  is  booked  as  prenteis  with  his  brother  germane 
Johne  Currie  hamerman  for  sevine  years  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the 
last  day  of  Apryle  1674. 

Glasgow  the  twelfc  day  of  Junij  1674. 

The  said  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  Johne  Hall,  baillie,  W"  \^'allace  and 
James  Farie  late  baillies  deacones  of  hamermen  tailzeours  cordouners  maltmen 
weivers  skiners  fleshours  bonetmakers  and  maissones  being  con  veined  anent  ane 
complent  given  in  before  them  be  Ale.xander  Danizell  late  deacon  of  wrights 
as  he  who  now  represents  the  sd  calling  as  deacon  in  place  of  the  deceast  Alex' 
Egleintoun  deacon  yxoi  against  Johne  Corse  wright  for  severall  tymes  abuseing 
of  the  sd  Ale.x''  Daniell  and  vnhansome  expressiones  not  fitt  to  be  named  vsed 
against  him  he  being  deacon  qlk  wes  clearUe  proven  against  the  sd  Johne 
Corse  for  qlk  the  sd  Johne  Corse  is  fyned  in  ten  pound  scots  for  the  sd  severall 
faults  and  declared  vncapable  to  have  any  office  in  the  sd  tred  for  three  years 
to  come  and  nether  to  vote  nor  be  voted  yrin  during  the  sd  space. 


Prenteis 
Lyndsay. 


Glasgow  the  sixtein  of  J  ulij  1674. 

The  sd  day  Mathow  Lyndsay  is  booked  prenteis  with  James  Clatchie 
weiver  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated 
the  nynt  day  of  May  1674. 


1674]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  483 

Decimo  octavo  Angustj  1674. 

The  same  day  Johne  Whyt  in  Woodsyd  is  booked  prenteis  with  Allan  whyt 
Mershell  wright  for  sevine  years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  P'^'^"'*^'^- 
indentor  dated  the  sixtein  day  of  Aprj'le  1674. 

Octavo  Angustj  1674. 

George  Ros  sone  to  v/  Geo.  Ross  is  booked  prenteis  w'  W"  Cowie  tailzeor  Prenteis  Ross, 
conforme  to  the  indentor  dated  the  twentie  nynt  day  of  Januarij  1674. 

Vltimo  August j  1674. 

David  Pettigrew  is  booked  prenteis  w*  Johne  Pettigrew  weiver  for  fyve  Prenteis 
years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  indentor  dated  the  twentie  sevint  of  August  P^"'S""<=^''- 
1674. 

Decimo  quinto  Septembris  1674. 

The  said  day  Robert  Scot  sone  to  Johne  Scot  mylne  WTight  is  booked  Scot  prentei?. 
prenteis  with  James  Snodgrase  tailzeor  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat  and 
fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  seventein  day  of  Junij  1674. 

The  said  day  Patrick  Bryce  deacon  cyveiner  W""  \^'allace  late  baillie  Extent 
with  the  deacones  of  crafts  being  conveined  in  Hutchesones  hospitall  for 
casting  up  the  compt  of  the  Gorball  rent  the  cropt  1673  they  did  find  the 
same  being  ane  hundreth  twentie  nyne  bolls  bear  at  fyve  pound  ten  shiOing 
the  boll  with  fourtie  shilling  payed  for  the  box  land  and  ane  hundreth  eightie 
pound  6s.  and  8d.  for  ther  pairt  of  the  Gorball  teynds  the  sd  year  the  minister 
of  Govanes  stipend  being  defalted  to  extend  to  the  soume  of  eight  hundreth 
nyntein  pound  sixtein  shilling  and  eight  pennies  qlk  soume  being  divyded  in 
threttie  ane  pairts  ther  falls  to  be  payed  for  ilk  thousand  merks  twentie  six 
pound  eight  shilling  and  ten  penneis  qlk  the  collector  is  appoynted  to  pay  to 
reptive  treds  conforme  to  yr  interests. 

Decimo  quarto  Octobris  1674. 

The  said  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  Johne  Hall  W"  Wallace  and  James  Lyts  deacon 
Fade  late  baiUies  with  the  deacones  of  crafts  and  ther  brethrein  of  counsell  '^>'^''^'"'^'^- 
being  conveined  for  choyseing  three  of  ther  number  to  be  presented  to  the 
provest  baillies  and  counsell  of  this  burgh  and  others  concerned  to  the  effect 
ane  of  them  may  be  choysen  to  be  deacon  cyveiner  of  the  sd  burgh  for  the 
enshewing  year  be  pluraUtie  of  vots  Johne  Hall  James  Farie  and  W™  Wallace 
wes  choysen  to  the  effect  forsd  and  the  lyts  ordained  to  be  presented  be  the 
deacones  of  hamermen  and  tailzeors. 

Wallace 
choysen 

The  sd  day  W"  Wallace  wes  elected  deacon  cweiner  for  ane  year  to  come,  deacon 


Gorball  rent. 


484 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1674 


Decimo  qiiinto  Octobris  1674. 


Followes  the  names  of  these  who  ar  to 
house  for  the  enshewing  year 

Alexander  Govane  deacon  of  hamermen 

James  Stevine  d.  of  tailzeours 

Johne  \\'odrop  d.  of  cordouners 

Daniell  Purdoun  d.  of  baxters 

Ro*  Gilmour  d.  of  weivers 

Mathow  M^^Aulay  visitor  of  maltmen 

Ar<>  Bogle  visitor  of  chirurgianes 


Hamermen 


Tailzeors 


Cordouners 


Baxters 


Weivers 


James  Farie 
W"^  Grahame 
W"  Philp 
Patrick  Mcflvicar 
George  Robiesone 

Johne  Dalrymple 
W™  Watsone 
Andrew  Scot 
Simeon  Tennent 
Ro*  Thomsone 

James  Hutcliesone 
James  Thomsone 
Johne  Parke 
Johne  Listoun 
W'm  Watsone 

James  Maissoune 
Gavine  Hepbume 

Robert  Flaickfield 
Johne  Patersone 
Robert  Falconer 


be  members  of  the  deacoti  cyveiners 
and  first  the  deacones  viz 

W"  Lidell  d.  of  wrights 

Johne  Clark  deacon  of  maissones 

ColUn  Crafourd  d.  of  skiners 

Niniane  Patersone  d.  of  cowpers 

Jo.  Barrie  d.  of  fleshours 

Johne  Gilespie  d.  of  gairdiners 

Johne  Walker  deacon  of  bonetmakers 


Maltmen 


Chirurgianes 


Wrights 


Skiners 


Maissounes 


Cowpers 


Fleshours 


Gairdiners 


Johne  Park 
George  Weingate  elder 
Patrick  Bryce 
Johne  Findlay 
Johne  Robiesone 

Johne  Hall 

W  David  Sharp 

James  Colhoun  baillie 
Thomas  Miller 

W™  Govane 
Thomas  Padie 

Robert  Boyd 
Johne  Gilhagie 

Robert  Young 
James  Sheills 

James  Watsone 
James  Gilmour 

\V"i  Hutchesone 
Johne  Wodrow 


Bonetmakers    Niniane  Spence 

The  said  day  the  haill  fomamed  persones  compeired  and  gave  ther  oathes 
as  counsellours  to  the  deacon  cyveiner  for  ane  year  to  come  except  Androw 
Scot  Johne  Listoun  M''  David  Sharp  James  Sheills  and  James  Gilmour  Ja. 
Farie  Pa.  Bryce  malt.  Simeon  Tennent  Daniell  Purdoun  Geo.  Weingate  elder 
Ro'  Thomsone  Jo"  Walker  W"'  Govane  Ro'  Boyd  James  Watsone. 


1674]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  485 

The  sd  day  the  deacon  con\'einer  \v'  his  sd  brethrein  of  counsell  being  also 
conveined  for  choyseing  four  of  ther  number  to  be  on  the  deane  of  gilds  court 
for  the  enshewing  year  be  pluralitie  of  vots  Daniell  Purdoun  Collein  Crafourd 
Thomas  Miller  and  \\'"'  Lidell  wer  elected  to  the  effect  forsd  and  appoynts  the 
deacon  cyveiner  to  present  them  as  vse  is. 

The  same  day  Alex''  Donaldsone  is  booked  prenteis  w'  Alex''  Montgomrie  Donaidsone 
feltmaker  for  fy\'e  years  and  two  indentor  dated  the  tent  of  September  1673.  ^'^"  ^'*' 

Qiiinlo  Novembris  1674. 

Conveined  the  deacon  cyveiner  Johne  Hall  James  Farie  Patrick 
Bryce  with  the  deacones  of  tailzeors  cordoners  visitor  of  maltmen 
and  the  deacones  of  weivers  cowpers  skiners  wrights  baxters  chirur- 
gianes  and  gairdiners. 

The  sd  day  the  fomamed  deacon  cyveiner  w'  the  fornamed  psones  cyveined  1000  merKs 
ordaines  ther  collector  to  lend  to  Thomas  Lining   litster  the  soume  of  ane  Thomas 
thousand  merks  scots  and  to  tak  securitie  of  his  lands  in  Brigate  yrfore  in  name  Luung. 
of  the  deacon  cyveiners  house  for  the  vse  of  the  poore  yrof  bute  before  the  mo'^y 
be  lent  appoynts  Baillie  Colhoun  w'  the  cyveiner  and  Johne  Hall  to  sight  the 
sd  Thomas  his  wryts  of  his  lands  y'  he  have  ane  sufficient  progres  and  y'  all 
inhibi-nes  be  purged. 

25  of  November  1674. 

The  said  day  James  Mureheid  sone  to  W""  Mureheid  in  Airth  is  booked  Prenteis 
prenteis  with  William  Crafourd  baxter  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat  and 
fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  fourt  day  of  November  1674. 

Deciino  quarto  Decembris  1674. 

The  said  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  Johne  Hall  James  Farie  Patrick  Bryce 
with  deacones  of  crafts  and  ther  brethrein  of  counsell  who  for  the  most  pairt 
wer  present  being  conveined  in  the  crafts  hospitall  James  Farie  Patrick  Bryce 
Simeon  Tennent  Androw  Scot  Daniell  Purdoun  George  Weingate  Ro'  Thomsone 
Johne  \\'alker  W"  Go\ane  Ro'  Boyd  and  James  Watsone  gave  ther  oathes  as 
counsellours  to  the  deacon  cyveiner  for  the  enshewing  year. 

The  same  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  with  his  brethrein  of  counsell  forsd 
being  also  conveined  for  making  of  Johne  Wodrop  collector  his  compt  of  his 
intromissioune  with  the  rent  belonging  to  the  crafts  house  fra  Michaelmes 
1673  to  Michaebnes  last  1674  qrof  charge  and  discharge  is  as  foUowes  and 
first  the  charge. 


Mureheid. 


486  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1674 

Charge. 

Imprimis  the  compter  charges  himselfe  with  q'  wes  resting  in 

his  hand  at  his  last  compt  making  extending  to       .  .     875  13  10 

Item  \\'ith  the  burges  money  for  the  last  year  is  .  .       38  13     4 

Item  with  q'  he  receaved  for  the  last  years  pairt  of  bucket  money 

is       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     145     0     o 

Item  he  charges  himselfe  with  the  maill  of  James  Duncanes  lands 

fra  Witsonday   1673   to   Witsonday  1674   viz    fra    M''    Ar^" 

M^Claine  for  ane  heigh  house  threttie  pound     Item  fra  James 

Bowie  for  ane  laich  house  twentie  two  pound  qcli  is  in  all       52     o     o 
Item  fra  Androw  Clark  for  the  sd  years  maill  of  ane  house  near 

to   the  hospitall       .  .  .  .  .  .       29     o    o 

Item  receaved  fra  Johne  Adame  for  ane  years  rent  of  the  hospitall 

yaird  fra  Mertimes  1673  to  Mertimes  1674    .  .  .       16    0    0 

Item  with  q*  he  receaved  fra  James  Ker  yt  he  wes  resting  to  the 

hospitall  be  band  .....     Soo    o    o 

Item  fra  him  for  ane  year  and  ane  quarters  arent  of  the  sd  soume 

fra   Mertimes   1672   to   Candlemes   1674        .  .  .       52     0     o 

Item  fra  Robert  Caruthers  of  arent  of  q'  he  is  resting     .  .       22     o     o 

Item  fra  Alexander  Govane  for  ane  years  arent  of  ane  hundreth 

merks  fra  Mertimes  1672  to  Mertimes  1673  .  .         3     6     8 

Item  fra  .\ndrow  Morsoune  for  ane  years  arent  of  four  hundreth 

merks  fra  Witsonday  1673  to  Witsonday  1674       .  .       14  13     4 

Item  fra  James  Mann  for  ane  years  arent  of  ane  hundreth  pound 

fra  Witsonday  1673  to  Witsonday  1674         .  .  .         5  10     0 

Item  fra  Johne  Findlay  for  ane  years  arent  of  ane  thousand  merks 

fra  Mertimes  1672  to  Mertimes  1673  .  .  •       33     6     8 

Item  fra  the  Laird  of  Ardincaple  for  ane  years  arent  of  fyve 

hundreth  merks  fra  Witsonday  1673  to  Wit.  1674      .  .       18     6     8 

Item  fra  the  sd  Laird  for  ane  years  arent  of  six  hundreth  merks 

fra  Lambes  1673  to  Lambes  1674      .  .  .  .       23     o     o 

Item  fra  W'"  Andersone  for  ane  years  arent  of  fyve  hundreth 

merks  fra  Witsonday  1673  to  Wit.  1674       .  .  .       iS     6     8 

Item  fra  \\''"  Thomsone  in  Auchinaime  for  ane  years  arent  of 

fyve  hundreth  merks  fra  Lambes  1673  to  Lambes  1674       .       23     o     o 
Item  fra  Thomas  Shearer  for  ane  years  arent  of  three  hundreth 

merks  fra  Mertimes  1672  to  Mertimes  1673  .  .       10    o    0 

Item  fra  Johne  Wallace  for  two  years  arent  of  ane  thousand  merks 

preceidmg   I\lichaelmes   1673  .... 

Item  fra  Johne  Scot  tailzeour  as  ane  pairt  of  his  gildbrother  fyne 
Item  fra  Johne  Scot  cowper  as  a  pairt  of  his  gildbrother  fyne 
Item  fra  W'"  Lidell  qlk  wes  resting  of  his  fyne    . 


73 

6 

8 

50 

0 

0 

66 

13 

4 

33 

6 

8 

i6 

13 

4 

40 

0 

0 

40 

0 

0 

33 

6 

8 

1674]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  4S7 

Item  fra  W™  Mershell  as  ane  pairt  of  his  lyne    . 

Item  fra  Johne  Gilespie  as  ane  pairt  of  his  fyne    . 

Item  fra  Andrew  Craige  qlk  \\es  resting  of  his  gildrie  fyne 

Item  fra  Walter  M<^Allaster  as  ane  pairt  of  his  fyne 

Item  fra  the  deacones  of  hamermen  tailzeours  cordouners  weivers 

baxters  cowpers  fleshours  chirurgianes  eiglit  pound  fra  each  of 

y"'  being  new  deacones  and  eight  tl  fra  Androw  Elphingstoun 

qlk  wes  resting  be  him  since  he  wes  visitor  of  the  chirurgianes 

is  in  all        .  .  .  .  .  .  .       72    o     o 

Item  fra  the  haill  treds  conforme  to  ther  reptive  proportiones  for 

suplie  of  the  house  .....     209  13     4 

Item  fra  Patrick  Bryce  qlk  wes  dew  be  Johne  Sheills  in  Gorballs 

be  band        .......     233    6     8 

Item  receaved  as  the  house  pairt  of  the  Gorball  rent  the  cropt 

1673  conforme  to  the  fear  is  .  .  .  .     211  10     8 

Item  receaved  of  grand  anwells  belonging  to  the  house  the  year 

1673  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       62  19    o 

Item  fra  Ro'  Herbertsone  of  grund  anwell  for  his  yaird  in  Deansyd 

for  the  years  1668  :  69  :    70  :  71  :    and  1672  at  i  ti  lis.  4d. 

be  year  is  .  .  .  .  .  .         7  16     8 

Item  receaved  in  pairt  pay'  of  the  soumc  promissed  for  getting 

the  house  pairt  of  the  ventir  salt      .  .  .  .       60    o     o 

Summa  of  the  charge  is      .  .  .  .  3390  10     2 

Followes  the  discharge. 

Imprimis  deburst  to  severall  poore  of  the  reptive  crafts  be  warrand 
dated  the  15  of  November  1673  conforme  to  ane  particular 
list  set  doune  yranent         ....  310    4    o 

Item  deburst  to  severall  poore  persones  by  ordour  of  the  deacon 

cyveiner  since  the  15  November  to  the  10  of  October  last      60  15     o 

Item  to  the  off''  for  his  suplie  by  ordour  of  the  deacon  cyveiner 

and   deacones  .  .  .  .  .800 

Item  the  compter  discharges  himsclfe  with  ane  tliousand  merks 

lent  wpon  band  to  Airdoch  and  his  cau's  at  Me.  1673  is      .     660  13    4 

Item  with  the  lyk  soume  lent  wpon  band  to  Ardincaple  and  his 

caul's  at  Candlemes  last     inde         ....     666  13    4 

Item  with  two  hundreth  merks  lent  to  Johne  Otterburne  and  his 

cau's  wpon  band  at  Candlemes  1674    inde  .  133    6    8 

Item  deburst  putting  wp  ane  brewhouse  chimney  head  and  for 
timber  and  strae  and  workmanship  and  for  clay  in  James 
Duncanes  land  .  .  .  .  .  .744 

Item  to  the  factour  of  the  coUedge  for  M"'  Johne  Howiesones  bursar      66  13    4 


4S8 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1674 


Item  deburst  to  the  six  poore  men  in  the  house  this  last  year 

being  to  y™  ilk  six  weiks  36  ll     inde 
Item  for  six  pair  shoes  to  the  six  old  men  at  30s.  each  pair  is 
Item  for  ellevine  monethes  coalls  to  the  six  men  each  moneth 

I  ll  los.  is  ...... 

Item  for  twelfe  shirts  to  the  six  men  each  shirt  is  23s.  4d. 

Item  for  six  sute  of  cloathes  to  y^^  and  for  furnishing  and  making 

Item  for  ane  meikle  coat  and  breitches  and  hatt  and  shoes  to  Ro* 

Andersone  off''  ...... 

Item  to  Johne  Cauldwell  cordoner  be  ordour  of  the  deacon  cyveiner 

and  deacones  for  his  suphe  .... 

Item  be  the  same  ordour  to  Johne  Drinnon  2  ll  i8s.  and  to  Johne 

M^Aulay  2  li  i8s.  and  (  )  Fausyd  baxter  i  ll  los. 

is  ....... 

Item  to  James  Andersone  for  three  years  few  dewtie  of  the  crafts 

of  the  Gorballs  lands  for  71,  72  and  73         . 
Item  deburst  to  the  offi"  be  ordour  of  the  deacon  cyveiner  and 

deacones  ...... 

Item  to  the  clerk  for  his  fiell       ..... 

Item  the  compters  owne  fiell  is     .  .  ... 

Item  to  the  off''  for  his  fieU  ..... 

Item  gi\'en  to  Androw  Black  for  mending  ane  lock  in  the  hospitall 
Item  lent  wpon  band  at  Jlertimes  last  to  Thomas  Lining  and  on 

security  of  his   lands  .... 

Suma  of  the  discharge  is     .  .  .  .  3170     i  10 

Qlk  compt  abo\'e\\Tin  being  read  calculat  and  laid  they  find  the  charge 
exceid  the  discharge  the  soume  of  t\\o  hundreth  twentie  pound  eight  shilling 
four  pennies  qlk  the  compter  is  ordaned  to  pay  to  the  subsequent  collector 
and  therfore  he  is  heirby  discharged  of  his  haill  intromissioune  he  payand  the 
sd  soume  for  now  and  ever. 


288 

0 

0 

9 

0 

0 

16 

10 

0 

14 

0 

0 

105 

9 

4 

17 

15 

10 

2 

18 

0 

7 

6 

0 

39 

10 

0 

4 

0 

0 

26 

0 

0 

24 

0 

0 

20 

0 

0 

0 

6 

0 

666  13     4 


W"  Watson 

choysen 

collector. 


The  said  da}'  be  plurahtie  of  vots  \\''"  W'atsone  tailzeour  wes  elected  and 
choysen  to  be  collector  to  the  crafts  hospitall  for  ane  j'ear  to  come  who  did 
accept  and  give  his  oath  of  fidehtie. 


Money  qlk 
the  new 
collector  is  to 
be  charged. 


Memorandum  the  collector  is  to  be  charged  with  the  soume  of  two  hundieth 
twentie  fyve  pounds  as  the  house  pairt  of  the  bucket  money  gotten  the  last 
year  qlk  he  is  to  receave  fra  the  last  collector.  Item  he  is  to  be  charged  with 
fyftie  four  pound  two  shiUing  four  pennies  of  burges  silver  the  last  year  qlk 
he  hes  presentUe  receaved.  Item  the  collector  is  to  be  charged  with  the  sousme 
contained  in  the  bands  following  qlk  he  is  to  wphft  and  qlk  bands  ar  presenthe 
delyvered  him     Imprimis  fra  Johne  Gilespie  gairdiner  fourtie  pound  qlk  he 


1674J        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  489 

is  resting  be  his  band  Item  Johne  Hodges  band  qrby  he  rests  fyftie  pound 
Item  Walter  M'^Alaster  sixtein  pound  13s.  4d.  qlk  he  rests  of  his  band  Item 
fra  W"  Mershell  fyftie  pound  qlk  he  rests  of  his  band  Item  fra  James  David- 
sone  fyftie  two  pounds  resting  of  his  band  Item  fra  James  Craiourd  threttie 
pound  qlk  he  rests  be  his  band. 

The  said  day  Hardgrayes  band  of  three  hundreth  merks  qlk  he  rests  to  Hardgrayes 
the  house  wes  given  to  the  collector  for  getting    pay*  of  the  sd  soume  and  ["h" coUector.° 
bygone  arents  or  then  new  securitie. 

The  sd  day  the  last  collector  produced  the  bands  following  qlk  wer  pute  Bands  pute  in 
in  the  box  Imprimis  ane  band  granted  to  the  house  be  Johne  Otterburne  "'^''°''- 
wright  as  prin"  and  Baillie  Collioun  and  W">  Lidell  wright  as  caul's  for  two 
hundreth  merks  bearing  arent  fra  Candlemes  last  Item  ane  band  of  ane 
thousand  merks  granted  to  the  house  be  Ardincaple  and  his  caul's  bearing  arent 
fra  Candlemes  last  Item  ane  band  of  ane  thousand  merks  bearing  arent  fra 
Mertimes  last  granted  to  the  house  be  Thomas  Lining  litster  conteining 
infeftment  of  his  land  for  securitie  yrof  with  the  infeftment  confoiTne  with 
the  haill  rights  and  securities  of  the  sd  land  conforme  to  ane  inventar  yrof 
qlk  the  collector  is  appoynted  to  subscryve  j''  ane  double  yrof  sub'  may  be 
given  to  the  sd  Thomas  Item  ane  band  of  ane  thousand  merks  granted  be 
Airdoch  and  his  caul's  bearing  arent  fra  Mertimes  1673  and  qlk  wer  pute  in 
the  box. 

Memorandum  the  present  collector  is  to  vplift  threttie  pound  scots  resting  Money  qrwith 
to  the  house  for  the  pairt  of  the  ventir  salt  qrwith  he  is  to  be  charged.  to'be°'^h'^r°'^d* 

Vigcsimo  quinio  Deccmbris  1674. 

The  said  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  with  Johne  Hall  James  Farie  Patrick  Wan-and 
Bryce  with  the  present  and  last  years  deacones  and  severall  others  of  the  ™^'<='^'°'^- 
brethrein  of  counsell  being  conveined  in  Hutchesones  hospitall  they  ordaine 
the  collector  to  pay  to  the  severall  poore  of  the  reptive  crafts  conforme  to  the 
list  set  doune  the  soume  of  fyvc  hundreth  sixtic  two  pound  fyve  shilling  four 
pennies  scots  and  this  sail  be  his  warrand  and  get  the  same  allo\\ed  to  him  at 
his  compt  making. 

17  0/  Deccinbcr  1674. 

The  said  day  Johne  Shaw  sone  to  James  Shaw  in  Chamerhouse  is  booked  Prenteis 
prenteis  with  Andrew  Baillie  hamerman  for  7  years  conforme  to  the  indentor  ^'^^"'• 
dated  the  fourtein  daj'  of  August  1674. 

Vigesimo  secundo  Deceinbris  1674. 
The  said  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  with  Johne  Hall  James  Farie  Patrick  Persones 
Bryce  with  the  deacones  of  tailzeours  baxters  maltmen  wrights  maissones  set'^the"*^'* '° 
skiners  cowpers  gairdncrs  \\ei%'ers  w'  the  collector  and  severall  others  of  the  GorbaUs 

lands. 


490 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1674 


Prenteis 
M'Kie. 


brethrein  being  conveined  in  Hutchesones  hospitall  and  considering  y'  the  taks 
of  the  Gorballs  lands  expyre  at  Mertimes  nixt  and  y'  it  is  requisit  to  know 
q'her  the  tennents  hes  ane  mj-nd  to  tak  new  taks  agane  they  therfore  appoynt 
BailHe  Colhoun  the  deacon  cyveiner  Joluie  Hall  James  Farie  Patrick  Bryce 
deacones  of  hamermen  tailzeours  maltmen  cordouners  and  the  collector  and 
any  fyve  of  y^  w'  the  cyveiner  to  be  ane  quorum  to  meit  with  the  tennents 
in  Gorballs  and  try  if  they  will  tak  the  land  of  new  and  q'  they  will  pay  more 
nor  formerUe  or  to  set  it  to  any  others  at  the  best  availe  they  can  and  to  report 
to  the  house. 

Tertio  die  Febriianj  1075. 

The  sd  day  Ro'  Mi^Kie  sone  to  W"  M<=Kie  in  Noblestoun  is  booked  prenteis 
w'  Johne  ]\I<=Kie  gairdiner  for  fy\^e  years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  conforme 
to  the  indentor  dated  the  eight  day  of  Junij  1674. 


Quinto  Feb^'}  i675- 

Prenteis  Rae.  The  same  day  Wilham  Rae  sone  to  Jo"  Rae  workman  is  booked  as  prenteis 

w'  Johne  Flaickfeild  weiver  for  fyve  years  and  two  j'ears  for  meat  and  fie 
indentor  past  yranent  dated  the  second  of  December  last. 

Twelfe  day  of  March  1675. 

Conveined  in  the  crafts  hospitall  the  deacon  cyveiner  Baillie 
Colhoun  Johne  Hall  and  James  Farie  with  the  deacones  of  crafts  and 
these  who  wer  deacones  the  last  year  who  for  the  most  pairt  wer 
present  and  severall  oyrs  of  the  brethrein  of  counsell. 

The  said  day  be  pluralitie  of  vots  W'iUiam  Mader  tailzeour  is  admitted 
to  be  ane  of  the  poore  men  in  the  crafts  house  and  is  to  have  the  haill  casuahties 


Mader 

admitted  to  be 
ane  of  the 

poore  men  in     belonging  j^to  as  the  rest  yrin  gets  in  place  of  the  deceast  Gilbert  Hall. 


Warrand 

collector. 


The  same  day  ordanes  the  collector  to  give  to  Gabriell  Listoun  twelfe 
pound  scots  and  four  pound  to  Ro'  Allan  for  ther  help  and  supphe. 


Convciner  and  The  same  day  grants  comissioune  and  power  to  the  deacon  cyveiner  and 

his  coUector  to  cQ^ector  to  subscrvve  the  taks  of  ther  lands  in  Gorballs  as  the  psones  sail  sett 

suD5cr\'ve  the  -^  * 

Gorbaii  taks.     the  same  to  qi"  it  is  referred. 

Band  given  to  The  sd  day  vmq"  George  Lyoun  his  band  of  300  tl  owing  to  the  house 

the  coUector.    ^^.gg  given  to  the  collector  to  try  if  any  thing  will  be  gotten  of  the  same. 

7  of  May  1675. 

Allasone  The  said  day  Johne  AUasone  sone  to  Johne  AUasone  weiver  is  booked  as 

prenteis.  prenteis  w'  David  Scot  skiner  for  fyve  jears  and  two  years  for  meat  and  fie 

conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  sevint  of  No''  1674. 


1675J       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  491 

12  of  May  1675. 

Joline  Cuniyng  sone  lau"  to  Johne  Cumyng  in  Woodsyd  is  booked  prenteis  Prenteis 
w'  Johne  Hodge  armourer  for  eight  years  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  "™>'"3- 
the  12  day  of  March  last. 

13  day  of  May  1675. 
The  said  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  w'  the  deacones  of  hamermen  tailzeours  Mitciieiis 
cordouners  maltmen  wrights  weivers  cowpers  skiners  gairdners  \\'  the  collector  Thomas 
and  severall  oyrs  of  yr  brethrein  being  conveined  they  have  concluded  that  the  J''"j'"*P  '^"A 
woodsett  W">  Mitchell  hes  upon  Thomas  Linings  land  be  bought  in  be  the 
house  and  to  tak  ane  right  fra  him  to  y""  and  if  the  collector  have  not  money 
to  pay  appoynts  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  collector  to  borrow  als  mutch  wpon 
band  as  will  satisfie  the  sd  \V'"  and  grants  y'"  heirby  full  power  and  comis- 
sioune  for  y">  and  in  ther  names  to  subscryve  the  sd  band  qlk  they  heirby 
declare  sail  be  als  sufficent  as  if  the  samen  wer  sub'  be  y""  all. 

20  May  1675. 

Johne  Farie  sone  to  v/  Gabriell  Farie  malt,  is  booked  prenteis  w'  Androw  Farie 
Yonge  tailzeour  for  fyve  years  and  two  indentor  dated  the  si.\t  of  May  instant.  '"^^°  ^^' 

Glasgow  the  ellevint  day  of  August  1675. 

The    sd    day  James    Gawie  sone  to  Ro'  Gawie  in  Mylnerige  is  booked  Prenteis 
prenteis  with  George  Ralstoun  gairdiner  for  six  years  and  two  for  meit  and  fie  '^^"''®- 
conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  third  day  of  Juhj  1671. 

Sixtcin  of  August  1675. 

The  same  day  Johne  Wodrow  sone  to  v/  W"i  Wodrow  in  Overcarmyle  Prenteis 
is  booked  as  he  who  is  bound  prenteis  to  Johne  Wodrow-  elder  gairdiner  and      °'^°^^- 
failzeing  of  him  be  decease  to  Ro'  and  W™  Wodrowes  his  sones  for  sevine  years 
conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  fyft  day  of  No''  1673. 

Seventein  of  August  1675. 

The  sd  day  Johne  Craig  sone  to  Barthlemew  Craig  workman  is  booked  Prenteis  Craig. 
prenteis  w'  Johne  Ralstoun  gardiner  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie 
indentor  dated  the  24  of  No""  1673. 

The  same  day  Thomas  Morsoune  sone  lau"  to  Thomas  Morsoune  gairdiner  Prenteis 
is  booked  prenteis  w'  Johne  Gilespie  gairdiner  for  sevine  years  and  two  for  ^^°'^^°""^' 
meat  and  tie  indentor  dated  the  15  of  Feb'''J  1675. 

The  said  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  w'  Baillie  Colhoun  and  deacones  of  .\nent 
crafts  with  ther  brethrein  of  counsell  who  for  the  most  pairt  wer  present  being  ^'■'""'"=''- 
conveined  in  Hutchesones  hospitall  and  taking  to  ther  consideratioune  the 


492 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1675 


toun  of  Greinocks  incroaching  wpon  the  toun  of  Glasgowes  liberties  by  vseing 
ane  frie  tred  contrair  the  priviledge  of  royall  burrov\es  by  importing  and 
exporting  goods  not  allowed  them  be  act  of  parliament  for  remeid  qrof  they 
recomend  the  samen  to  the  proveist  baillies  and  counsell  of  this  burgh  to  tak 
some  course  they  think  most  fitting  for  getting  the  sd  toun  of  Greinock  dis- 
charged to  vse  any  sutch  comerce  or  tred  and  declares  thej'  sail  be  assisting 
to  the  sds  magistrats  and  counsell  in  q'  lyes  in  ther  power  and  appoynts  Baillie 
Colhoun  and  the  deacon  cyveiner  to  repair  to  Ed"'  with  these  to  be  appoynted 
b}'  the  sds  magistrats  and  counsell  or  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  brethrein  to 
advyce  and  consult  the  bussines. 

Vigesimo  quarto  August]  ib/S- 

Greinock.  The  said  day  the  deacon  cyv-einer  Baillie  Colhoun  James  Farie  with  the 

deacones  of  crafts  and  the  most  p'  of  ther  brethrein  of  counsell  bemg  con- 
veined  they  have  enacted  statute  and  ordaned  and  heirby  enacts  statuts  and 
ordanes  that  no  craftsman  within  this  burgh  traffick  or  tred  with  onfreemen 
nor  vse  any  merchandising  or  bargane  with  them  contrair  the  articles  set  doune 
be  the  magistrats  and  counsell  of  this  burgh  and  that  they  sail  not  contravein 
the  samen  vnder  the  paines  and  penalties  set  doune  in  the  act  made  yranent. 


Prenteis 
Donaldsonc. 


Prenteis 
Noble. 


Prenteis 
Dougall. 


Extent 
Gorball  rent. 


Sexto  Odobris  1675. 

The  sd  day  Alexander  Donaldsone  sone  to  v/  Johne  Donaldsone  in 
Bothwell  is  booked  as  prenteis  w'  Robert  Telpher  hamerman  for  fyve  years 
and  two  years  for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  4  day  of 
August  1675. 

The  same  day  Ro'  Noble  sone  to  Major  George  Noble  is  booked  as  prenteis 
with  George  Buntein  hamerman  for  fyve  3'ears  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  con- 
forme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  fourt  day  of  August  1675. 

The  sd  day  Walter  Dougall  is  booked  prenteis  with  Ari^  Galbraith  cuttler 
for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the 
twelfe  day  of  August  last. 

Att  Glasgow  the  tent  day  of  September  1675. 

The  said  daj'  being  conveined  in  Hutchesones  hospitall  the  deacon  cyveiner 
BailUe  Colhoun  Johne  Hall  with  the  deacones  of  crafts  and  the  collector  for 
casting  the  Gorball  rent  the  cropt  1674  they  find  the  samen  being  ane  hundreth 
twentie  nj'ne  bolls  victuall  at  sixtein  merk  the  boll  to  extend  to  ane  thousand 
three  hundreth  sevintein  [?  seventy]  six  pound  Item  the  fourt  pairt  of  the 
Gorballs  teynds  rebaittand  ane  hundreth  sixtie  two  pound  yrof  payed  for  the 
minister  of  Govanes  stipend  extends  to  ane  hundreth  four  pound  threttine 
shilling  four  pennies  with  fourtie  shilling  for  the  boath  land  all  wliich  being 


1675)        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  493 

divyded  in  threttie  ane  pairts  ther  falls  to  be  divyded  amongst  the  crafts  for 
ilk  thousand  merks  conforme  to  ther  interests  fourtie  sevine  pound  sixtein 
shilling  eight  pennies  qlk  the  collector  is  ordoured  to  pay  accordinglie. 

Second  of  October  1675. 

James  Boyd  sone  lau"  to  W™  Boyd  in  Bothwell  is  booked  as  he  who  served  Prenteis 
Johne  Clark  maissoune  as  prenteis  dureing  the  tyme  of  his  prenteisship  con- 
forme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  25  of  August  1668. 


Boyd. 


collector. 


cyveiner. 


Tent  day  of  October  1675. 

The  said  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  w*  James  Farie  Johne  Hall  and  the  vvarrand 
deacones  of  crafts  being  conveined  with  the  most  pairt  of  the  last  years  deacones 
they  ordaine  the  collector  to  have  ane  warrand  for  the  soume  of  ane  hundreth 
threttie  eight  pound  nyne  shilling  four  pennies  deburst  be  him  to  severall 
poore  persones  conforme  to  the  list  and  compt  yrof  produced  and  qlk  soume 
sail  be  allowed  to  the  sd  collector  w'  the  making  of  his  compt  and  appoynt 
the  clerk  to  give  him  out  ane  warrand  for  y'  effect. 

Ait  Glasgow  the  threttine  day  of  October  1675. 

The  said  day  William  Wallace  deacon  cyveiner  Johne  Wallace  baillie  and  Lytts  deacon 
the  deacones  of  craft  with  the  brethrein  of  counsell  being  conveined  in  the 
crafts  hospitall  for  choysing  two  of  ther  number  to  be  presented  with  the  sd 
W™  Wallace  to  the  proveist  baillies  and  counsell  of  this  burgh  and  others 
interested  to  the  effect  they  may  mak  cloyse  of  ane  of  the  three  to  be  deacon 
conveiner  of  the  sd  burgh  for  the  year  enshewing  be  pluralitie  of  votts  James 
Farie  and  Johne  Hall  wer  choysen  to  be  presented  with  the  sd  W™  Wallace 
to  the  effect  forsd  and  appoynts  the  lytt  to  be  presented  be  the  deacones  of 
hamermen  and  tailzeours. 

The  same  day  the  sd  James  Farie  wes  elected  and  choysen  to  be  deacon  James  Fane 
cyveiner  for  the  enshewing  year. 

Decimo  quarto  Ocfobris  1675. 

Followes   the   names   of  these   who   ar   to    be   members  and  coiinsellours  of  the 
deacon  cyveiners  house  for  the  enshewing  year  and  first  the  deacones  viz 

James  Ker  deacon  of  hamermen  Thomas  Miller  d.  of  wrights 

Archibald  Flemyng  d.  of  tailzeours  Ro'  Boyd  d.  of  maissounes 

James  Thomsone  deacon  of  cordouners  CoUine  Crafourd  d.  of  skiners 

Gavine  Hepburne  deacon  of  baxters  Ro*  Young  d.  of  cowpers 

Ro'  Campbell  visitour  of  maltmen  James  Watsone  d.  of  fleshours 

M''  Charles  Mowat  visitour  of  chirur.  George  Ralstoun  vis.  of  gairdiners 

Patrick  Lang  d.  of  weivers  Johne  Walker  d.  of  bonetmakers 


deacon 
cyveiner. 


494 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1675 


Hamermen 


Tailzeours 


Cordouners 


Baxters 


Maltmen 


Alexander  Govane 
W"  Grahame 
Johne  Smith 
George  Robiesone 
Robert  Telpher 

James  Stevine 
Simeon  Tennent 
Johne  Dalrymple 
Androw  Scot 
Ro'  Thomsone 


Johne  Wodrop 
James  Hutchesone 
Johne  Listoun 
Johne  Park 
^^■^^  N\'atsone 

Daniell  Purdoun 
W™  Crafourd 

Johne  \^'allace  baillie 
W"  Wallace 
Patrick  Bryce 
Mathow  M<^Aulay 
Johne  Findlay 


Chirurgianes  Johne  Hall 


Ar*  Bogle 


Waivers 


Ro'  Gilmour 
Patrick  Bryce 
Robert  Flaickfeild 


Wrights 

Maissones 

Skinners 

Cowpers 
Fleshours 

Gairdiners 


James  Colquhoun 
Wi»  Lidell 


Johne  Clark 
Johne  Gilhagie 

W"  Govane 
Johne  Howie 

Niniane  Patersone 
James  Sheills 

Johne  Barrie 
James  Gilmour 


Johne  Gilespie 
Robert  Tennent 


Bonetmakers  Niniane  Spence 


Counselloiirs 
sworne  and 
names  oi  the 
absents. 


The  said  day  the  haill  fornamed  persones  did  accept  and  give  ther  oathes 
as  counsellours  to  the  deacon  cyveiner  for  ane  year  to  come  except  James 
Colhoun  Johne  Hall  W"i  Grahame  Geo.  Robiesone  Simeon  Tennent  Ro' 
Thomsoune  Johne  Listoun  Patrick  Bryce  Ro'  Flaickfield  Thomas  Miller  Johne 
Gilhagie  Colline  Crafourd  Johne  Howie  Wilham  Govane  Niniane  Patersone 
Jo"  Walker  Jo"  Barrie  and  James  Gilmour  who  wer  absent. 

Persones  The  samen  day  the  haill  fornamed  persones  who  wer  present    did    be 

keepThe'"    ).  pluralitie  of  votts  make  choyse  of  James  Colquhoun  W"^  ^^'allace  Johne  Hall 


i675]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  495 

and  Patrick  Bryce  to  keep  the  dean  of  gilds  court  as  four  of  his  brethrein  for 
ane  year  to  come  and  appoynts  the  deacon  cyveiner  to  present  them  as  vse  is. 

The  sd  day  George  Andersone  wes  continowed  clerk  to  the  house.  cierk  cont^ 

The  sd  day  Ro'  Andersone  cytinowed  off. 

Eightein  day  of  October  1675. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  with  Johne  Wallace,  bailhe,  W""  Wallace  Persones 
Patrick  Bryce  with  the  most  pairt  of  the  deacones  of  crafts  and  severall  of  seu°the^ 
the  brethrein  of  counsell  being  conveined  in  Hutchesones  for  laying  doune  f^"^*^^"^ 
some  fitt  course  for  setting  the  crafts  pairt  of  the  lands  in  Gorballs  they  did 
nominat  and  appoynt  Bailhe  Wallace  the  deacon  cyveiner  W"  Wallace  Johne 
Hall  Patrick  Bryce  malt,  deacone  of  hamermen  visitour  of  maltmen  deacones 
of  tailzeours  and  cordouners  with  the  collector  to  sett  the  crafts  pairt  of  ther 
lands  in  Gorballs  to  the  best  improvement  they  can  and  declaire  any  three  of 
the  sds  persones  with  the  deacon  cyveiner  sail  be  ane  quorum  to  the  effect 
forsd  and  grants  comissioune  to  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  his  collectors  to 
subscrj've  the  taks  of  the  sd  lands  to  these  who  sail  happen  to  tak  the  samen 
in  name  of  the  haill  house  qlk  is  heirby  declared  to  be  als  sufficient  as  if  they 
subscryved  the  samen  themselves  and  q''at  they  obleis  themselves  to  abyd 
firm  and  stable. 

At  Glasgow  the  twentie  tieo  day  of  November  jajvjc  seavintie  fyve  years. 

Conveined  in  Hutchesones  hospitall  Johne  Wallace,  bailhe,  the 
deacon  cyveiner  James  Colhoun  Patrick  Bryce  malt,  with  the  present 
deacones  and  these  who  wer  deacones  the  last  year  and  severall 
others  of  ther  brethrein  of  counsell. 

The  qlk  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  made  report  that  he  and  these  who  wer  Report  anent 
appoynted  to  sett  the  Gorball  lands  had  mett  with  severall  of  the  tennents  in  j^andsfn""^ 
Gorballs  and  that  they  had  offered  ane  boll  of  victuall  for  ilk  aiker  of  the  craft  GorbaUs 
or  infeild  land  more  nor  the  samen  payed  formerlie  and  that  ther  wes  sex  ^pp™^^"* 
peckis  offered  for  y'  infeild  land  possest  be  W'"  Corbet  more  nor  the  samen 
payed  and  that  ther  wes  two  pecks  victuall  offered  for  the  aiker  of  outfeild 
land  more  nor  the  samen  payed  before  and  that  some  of  the  tennents  in  Gorballs 
had  condescended  to  tak  the  samen  at  y*  rate  qlk  report  was  allowed  and 
proven  be  the  haill  meiting  aforsd  and  appoyntis  the  deacon  conveiner  and  his 
collector  as  they  ar  be  the  former  act  to  subscryve  the  taks  to  sutch  of  ther 
tennents  as  hes  ane  mynd  to  tak  the  sds  lands  or  to  any  others  y'  will  accept 
yrof  on  the  forsd  pryce  and  to  set  the  boatih  land  as  formerlie. 


496  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1675 

Sixtein  day  of  December  1675. 

Conveined  the  deacon  cyveiner  \v'  James  Colhoun  Johne  Hall 
W'm  Wallace  with  the  deacones  of  crafts  and  ther  brethren  of  counsell 
who  for  the  most  pairt  wer  present  in  the  crafts  hospitall. 

The  said  day  James  Colhoun  Johne  Hall  Geo.  Robiesoune  Pat.  Bryce 
weiver  Ro*  Flaicktield  Jo"  Gilhagie  Johne  Howie  W"^  Grahame  and  W™ 
Govane  gave  ther  oathes  as  counsellours  to  the  deacon  cyveiner  for  the  en- 
shewing  year. 

The  qlk  day  \\™  \A'atsone  collector  made  his  compt  of  his  intromissione 
with  the  rents  belonging  to  the  crafts  house  in  presence  of  the  deacon  cyveiner 
and  deacons  and  ther  brethren  of  counsell  this  last  year  qrof  charge  and  dis- 
charge is  as  followes  and  first  the  charge. 

Charge. 
Imprimis  the  compter  charges  himselfe  with  what  he  recea\-ed  fra 

Johne  ^^'odrop  last  collector  y*  wes  resting  in  his  hands  at  his 

compt  making  extending  to  ...  .     220     8  10 

Item  \\ith  q*  he  receaved  fra  Johne  Wodrop  for  the  crafts  pairt 

of  the  bucket  money  is       .  .  .  .  .     225     o     o 

Item  \\ith  q'  he  receaved  from  Simeon  Tennent  of  burgess  money 

produced  at  the  table  .  .  .  .  .       54     2     0 

Item  with  q'  wes  resting  of  the  proffeit  of  the  crafts  p'  of  the 

ventir  salt  bought  fra  y'"  the  other  year       .  .  .       30     o     o 

Item  receaved  fra  Patrick  Bryce  for  the  crafts  pairt  of  the  ventir 

daills  sold  to  y"'  the  last  year  .  .  .  .       66  13    4 

Item  the  house  pairt  of  the  Gorball  rent  the  cropt  1674  at  47  1i 

i6s.  8d.  per  thousand  the  pairt  being  8000  m  is     . 
Item  with  the  ground  anwells  belonging  to  the  house  the  sd  year 

extends   to  ...... 

Item  with  q'  he  receaved  fra  M^  Archbald  M<=Laine  for  the  maill 

of  James  Duncanes  heigh  house  fra  Witsonday  1674  to  Wit- 

sonday  1675  ...... 

Item  fra  James  Bowie  for  ane  laigh  house  of  the  sds  lands  the  sd  year 
Item  fra  Androw  Black  for  the  house  and  smidie  belonging  to 

the  hospitall  the  sd  year      .  .  .  .  .       29    o     o 

Item  fra  Johne  Adame  for  the  rent  of  the  hospitall  yaird  fra  Mer- 

times  1674  to  Mertimes  1675  is        .  .  .  .       16     o     o 

Item  with  q'  he  receaved  fra  Archibald  Stewart  for  two  years  arent 

of  six  hundreth  and  fyftie  merks  resting  be  him  to  the  hospitall 

fra  Mertimes  1672  to  Mertimes  1674  allowing  the  rebaitment 

for  ane  of  the  years  conforme  to  the  act  of  parha'  is  .       47  13     4 


382 

13 

4 

63 

2 

0 

30 

0 

0 

22 

0 

0 

1675I        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  497 

Item  fra  Alexander  Go  vane  hamerman  for  ane  years  arent  of  100 

merk  fra  Mertimes  1673  to  Mertimes  1674  .  .         400 

Item  fra  Hardgray  for  two  years  arent  of  three  hundreth  merks 

fra  Mertimes  1672  to  Mertimes  1674  .  .  .       22     o    o 

Item  receaved  fra  Johne  Wallace  for  ane  years  arent  of  1000  merks 

fra  Mertimes  1673  to  Mertimes  (  )         .  .       40     o     o 

Item  fra  Johne  Otterburne  for  ane  years  arent  of  two  hundreth 

merks  fra  Candlemes  1674  to  Cand.  1675      .  .  .800 

Item  fra  Patrick  Bryce  weiver  for  three  years  arent  of  600  merks  fra 

Mertimes  1671  to  Mer.  1674  .  .  .  .       68    o    o 

Item  fra  the  Laird  of  Airdoch  for  ane  year  arent  of  ane  thousand 

merk  fra  Mertimes  1673  to  Mer.  1674  .  .  .       40     o     o 

Item  fra  Johne  Findlay  maitman  for  ane  years  arent  of  1000 

merk  the  sd  year  .  .  .  .  .       40    o    o 

Item  fra  W'"  Wairden  in  Auchinloch  for  two  years  arent  of  300 

merks  fra  Mertimes  1672  to  Mer.  1674         .  .  .       24    o    o 

Item  fra  James  Mann  wryter  for  ane  years  arent  of  ane  hundreth 

pounds  fra  Witsonday  1674  to  Wit.  1675      .  .  .600 

Item  fra  Johne  Corse  wright  for  two  years  arent  of  six  hundreth 

merks  fra  Mertimes  1672  to  Mertimes  1674  .  .       44    o    o 

Item  fra  Thomas  Shearer  wryter  for  ane  years  arent  of  three 

hundreth  merk  fra  Mertimes  1673  to  Mer.  1674       .  .       12     o     o 

Item  fra  W™  Andersone  for  ane  years  arent  of  500  merk  fra  Wit- 
sonday 1674  to  Witsonday  1675  .  .  .  .  20  o  0 
Item  fra  Johne  Findlay  maitman  for  ane  years  arent  of  his  1000 

merk  resting  to  the  house  fra  Mertimes  1674  to  Mertimes 

1675  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       40    o    o 

Item  fra  W™  Thomsone  in  Auchinaime  for  ane  years  arent  of  six 

hundreth  merks  fra  Lambes  1674  to  Lambes  1675    .  .       24     o     0 

Item  fra  the  Ladie  Ardincaple  in  name  of  her  deceast  husband 

for  ane  year  and  halfe  years  arent  of  ane  thousand  merk 

fra  Candlemes  1674  to  Lambes  1675  .  .  .       60    0    o 

Item  receaved  farder  fra  her  for  ane  years  arent  of  500  merk  fra 

Witsonday  1674  to  Witsonday  1675  .  .  .       20    o    o 

Item  receaved  farder  fra  her  ane  years  arent  of  600  merk  fra 

Lambes  1674  to  Lambes  1675  is        .  .  .  .       24    o    0 

Item  fra  Thomas  Linning  litster  for  ane  years  arent  of  ane  thousand 

merk  fra  Mertimes  1674  to  Mer.  1675  .  .  .       40     o     0 

Item  with  q'  he  receaved  fra  v/  James  Crafourd  his  relict  for  ane 

pairt  of  his  gildbrother  fyne  .  .  .  .       20    o     o 

Item  fra  Walter  M<^Alaster  in  compleat  pay'  of  his  gildbrother 

fyne  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       16  13     4 

Item  fra  W™  Mershell  in  pairt  payment  of  his  fyne         .  .       16  13    4 

2H 


498  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1675 

Item  fra  Johne  Scot  cowper  in  compleat  pay'  of  his  gildbrother 

fyne  of  q'  he  wes  resting      .  .  .  .       33    6    8 

Item  with  q'  he  receaved  fra  Johne  Gilespie  as  ane  pairt  of  his 

gildbrother  fyne         .  .  .  .  .  .       20     o     o 

Item  fra  Johne  Hodge  hamerman  for  ane  pairt  of  his  gildbrother 

fyne  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       25    o    0 

Item  receaved  fra  the  deacones  of  tailzeours  cordouners  maltmen 

weivers  wrights  cowpers  skinners  and  gairdiners  fra  each  of 

y™  eight  pound  scots  being  new  deacones    is  .  .       64    0    0 

Item  receaved  fra  the  reptive  crafts  confonne  to  the  proportiones 

as  they  vsed  to  pay  formerlie  is        .  .  .  .     209  13    4 

Item  receaved  fra  Johne  Findlay  maltman  the  equall  halfe  of  the 

prin"  soume  of  1000  merk  he  rests  to  the  house     is  .     333    6    8 

Suma  of  the  charge  is         .  .  .  .  2461     6    4 


FollOiCcs  ihe  Discharge. 

Imprimis  the  compter  discharges  himselfe  with  q'  wes  distribute 
to  the  severall  poore  of  the  crafts  conforme  to  ane  warrand 
dated  the  25  of  December  1674  qlk  is  .  .  .     562     5     4 

Item  given  to  the  poore  be  ane  other  warrand  dated  the  tent  day 

of  October  1675  extending  to  ...  .     138     9     4 

Item  lent  wpon  band  to  Patrick  Bryce  weiver  be  ordour  of  the 

deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones         ....     333    6    8 

Item  payed  to  the  factor  of  the  Coledge  of  Glasgow  for  M""  Johne 

Howiesones  bursar  confonne  to  the  discharge  .  .       66  13     4 

Item  for  ane  sute  of  cloathes  to  Ro''  Andersone  officer  being  ane 
meikle  coat  justicoat  breitches  lynings  hatt  w'  silk  buttounes 
to  the  cloathes  and  haill  fumitour  and  making  is        .  .       24     o     0 

Item  deburst  for  v/  Gilbert  Halls  winding  sheet  .  .220 

Item  for  repairing  the  house  q""  Androw  Black  dwells  for  three  daills 
yrto  for  helping  the  doore  and  ane  bed  and  for  dressing  the 
glase  windowes  naills  bands  cruikes  for  sixtein  threave  of 
strae  for  rigging  and  workmanship  conforme  to  the  compt  is       24     i  10 

Item  for  ten  threive  of  strae  to  James  Duncanes  land  300  riging 

ane  window  mending  and  workmanship       .  .  .       14  13    6 

Item  for  ane  coall  ridell  to  the  poore  men  in  the  hospitall  .         060 

Item  for  elevine  monethes  coalles  to  the  sd  poore  men  fra  Dec- 
ember 1674  to  December  1675  at  30s.  ilk  moneth  is  .       16  10    o 

Item  to  the  sd  six  poore  men  in  the  house  ilk  six  merks  fra  the 
15  of  December  1674  to  the  15  December  1675  being  36  li 
ilk  six  merks  extends  to      .  .  .  .  .     288    o    0 


1675]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


499 


Item  deburst  for  six  pair  of  shoes  to  the  sd  old  men  at  30s.  the  pair 

is  ...... 

Item  for  twelfe  shirts  to  the  sd  si.\  men  at  26s.  8d.  per  peice 
Item  deburst  for  stockines  and  schoes  to  the  officer  be  the  deacon 

cyveiners  ordour  .... 

Item  deburst  for  the  ground  anwell  of  James  Duncans  land 
Item  for  raiseing  of  homing  and  poynding  against  James  David 

sone   and   charging   him        .... 
Item  allowed  to  the  compter  for  halfe  ane  j'ears  arent  of  400  merl 

advanced  for  the  vse  of  the  house    . 
Item  deburst  to  the  clerk  for  his  fiall 
Item  to  the  officer  for  his  fiall  is  .  .  . 

Item  the  collectors  owne  fiall  is  .  .  . 

Item  lent  to  Johne  Cum^Tig  maltman  and  his  caul's  wpon  band 
Item  deburst  to  severall  poore  persones  since  the  last  vvarrand 

be  ordour  of   the   deacon   cyveiner  and   late   cyveiner   and 

severall  of  the  deacones  and  jt  brethrein 

Suma  of  the  discharge  is     . 


9  0 

0 

14  0 

0 

3  12 

0 

0  13 

4 

« 

0 

0 

26 

13 

4 

20 

0 

0 

24 

0 

0 

333 

6 

8 

34    8    o 
1947    5    4 


Sua  charge  and  discharge  being  compared  calculat  and  laid  it 
is  found  that  the  charge  exceids  the  discharge  in  the  soume  of  fyve 
hundreth  fourtein  pound  ane  shilling  qlk  the  compter  is  ordained 
to  pay  to  the  subsequent  collector  and  qrwith  he  is  to  be  charged 
and  therfore  the  compter  is  heirby  exonered  and  discharged  of  his 
haill  intromissioune  with  the  rent  of  the  house  conforme  to  the  compt 
abovewritten  he  payand  in  the  sd  soume  resting  in  his  hand. 

The  same  day  the  wodsett  rights  y'  W"  Mitchell  and  his  sones  had  of  Papers 
Thomas  Linings  land  in  Brigate  with  the  other  papers  relaiting  yrto  and  the  Lin/ngs"fand 
new  right  gotten  fra  the  sd  Thomas  and  them  for  the  behove  of  the  crafts  p"'_^  '"  ">« 
house  for  securitie  of  the  money  wer    all    pute  in  the  box  conforme  to  ane 
inventar  of  the  samen  qrof  ther  is  ane  double  to  be  delyvered  to  the  sd  Thomas 
Lining  for  making  the  samen  furthcoming  to  him  qlk  the  collector  is  heirby 
corhissionat  to  subscryve. 

The  sd  day  the  band  of  ane  thousand  merks  qlk  Johne  Findlay  malt.  Findiays 
wes  resting  wes  riven  and  cancelled  in  respect  he  hes  payed  the  halfe  yrof  for  band™*^'  ^ 
qlk  the  collector  hes  compted  and  the  sd  Tohne  his  new  band  for  500  merks  distroyed  and 

500  mccAs  pute 
ill  the  box. 


granted  be  him  and  his  cau"^  wes  pute  in  the  box. 


As  also  the  band  granted  be  Patrick  Bryce  weiver  of  fyve  hundreth  merks  Bands  pute  in 
and  the  band  granted  be  Johne  Cumyng  maltman  and  his  caul's  of  other  fyve  ^^^  ^°'^' 
hundreth  merks    Item  Hardgrays  band  and  Lyouns  band  y'  wer  both  given 
to  the  collector  the  last  year  wer  all  pute  inthe  box 


500 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1675 


Watsone 

cytinowed 

collector. 


Money  qnvith 
the  collector  is 
to  be  charged. 


The  said  day  be  pluralitie  of  votts  William  Watsone  wes  choysen  and 
continowed  to  be  collector  to  the  house  for  ane  year  to  come  who  did  accept 
and  give  his  oath. 

The  same  day  ther  wes  produced  of  burges  silver  qlk  wes  given  to  the 
collector  and  qrwith  he  is  to  be  charged  twentie  eight  poimd  13s.  Item  ther 
wes  produced  of  bucket  money  for  the  last  year  qrwith  the  collector  is  hkwayes 
to  be  charged  ane  himdred  and  ten  pounds  as  also  he  is  to  be  charged  with 
ten  pound  resting  be  v/  James  Crafourd  of  his  gildrie  fyne  Item  w'  fyftie 
two  pound  resting  be  James  Davidsone  of  his  iyne  Item  with  25  li  resting 
be  Jo°  Hodge  of  his  fj-ne  Item  w'  33  li  resting  be  W"  Mershell  and  40  li 
be  Johne  Gilespie  all  for  the  gildrie  fjnes. 

The  said  day  in  answer  to  the  suphcatioune  given  in  and  presented  be 
David  Robiesone  sone  to  David  Robiesone  beltmaker  they  have  presented 
and  heirby  presents  the  sd  David  to  that  bursars  place  of  philosophic  in  the 
colledge  at  the  house  presenta'ime  conforme  to  v/  M''  Johne  Howiesones 
mortiticatioune  qlk  is  to  vaick  at  Lambes  nixt  and  his  entrie  yito  to  be  at  3-* 
tjTne  and  to  the  casuahties  accordinglie. 

^'°°.t°  The  said  day  the  deacon  cvveiner  and  remanent  psones  forsd  having 

continow  •'  •^  r  o 

deacon  longer  taken  to  ther  considera~une  that  some  persones  gets  themselves  continowed 
nor  ane  year.  jQjjgg^  deacon  nor  on  year  without  obteining  libertie  either  fra  the  counsell  of 
Glasgow  or  the  deacon  cj'veiner  and  deacones  and  ther  brethrein  which  is 
contrair  to  foiTner  acts  of  this  house  it  is  therfore  enacted  statute  and  ordained 
that  if  any  person  continow  deacon  of  his  tred  longer  nor  on  year  together 
without  libertie  obteined  fra  the  crafts  house  that  he  sail  pay  in  of  f^Tie  for 
the  vse  of  the  poore  the  soume  of  ane  hundreth  pounds  scots. 


Bursar 
Robiesone. 


Warrand 
coUector. 


Glasgow  twentie  doy  of  December  1675. 

Con\-eined  in  Hutchesones  hospitall  Joline  Wallace  bailHe  the 
deacon  cyveiner  James  Colhoim  Joline  Hall  W™  Wallace  Patrick 
Br\xe  malt,  with  the  present  deacons  and  the  most  pairt  of  the  last 
years  deacones  and  severall  of  yr  brethrein. 

The  said  day  Thomas  MiUer  Niniane  Patersone  and  Johne  Barrie  gave 
ther  oathes  as  counsellours  for  the  j-ear  enshewing. 

The  same  day  ordaines  the  collector  to  ha\"e  ane  warrand  for  the  soume 
of  fyve  hundreth  fyftie  sevine  pound  six  shilling  and  eight  pennies  scots  dis- 
tribute to  the  poore  of  the  several!  treds  conforme  to  the  particular  list  sett 
doune  jaanent  as  also  ordaines  the  collector  to  give  to  the  officer  to  the  house 
six  pounds  for  service. 


1676]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  501 

The  same  day  Patrick  Bryce  malt,  the  collector  aiid  Joline  Wodrop  with  .^nent 
the  deacones  of  wrights  ar  appoynted  to  tak  inspectioune  of  the  conditioune  iai,j. 
of  Ro^  Caruthers  houss  and  q'  he  will  be  resting  to  the  house  of  bygone  arent. 

Sevinl  of  Febrnarij  1676. 

Ale.xander  Pirrie  is  booked  as  he  who  is  bound  prenteis  w'  James  Ker  Prenteis 
hamerman  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour 
dated  the  first  of  Januarij  1676. 

12  of  Feb"'  1676. 
W'ni  Waterstoun  is  booked  prenteis  with  James  VVaterstoun  hamerman  Prenteis 
his  brother  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour 
dated  the  second  of  Feb'''J  instant. 

23  Feb"'  1676. 

Johne  Maxwell  sone  to  Ritchard  Maxwell  indweller  in  Glasgow  is  booked  Prenteis 
prenteis  w'  Lyoun  Barr  sktner  for  sevine  years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  the 
indentour  dated  the  twentie  two  day  of  Feb^'J  1675. 

Lasl  of  Fel/'i  1676. 

The  sd  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  Baillie  Wallace  Johne  Hall  W™  Wallace  Tak  sett  to 
late  bailhes  w*  Patrick    Biyce  malt,  the  deacones  of  hamermen   tailzeours  approven! 
cordouners   maltmen   weivers   cowpers   baxters  skiners   chirurgians   fleshours 
with  the  most  pairt  of  the  last  years  deacones  and  the  collector  who  did  ratiffte 
allow  and  approve  of  the  tak  of  some  of  the  lands  in  Gorballs  last  possest  be 
\N^  Corbet  as  the  samen  is  now  sett  to  Johne  Vrie. 

15  of  Apryle  1676. 

The  sd  day  James  Aderstoun  is  booked  prenteis  with  hr'^  Galbraith 
hamerman  for  six  years  as  prenteis  and  two  years  for  meat  and  fie  conforme 
to  ther  indentour  dated  the  twentie  fyft  of  March  1676. 

Glasgow  twentie  day  of  Apryle  1676. 

Conveined  in  Hutchesones  hospital!  the  deacon  cyveiner  Baillie 
Wallace  with  the  deacones  of  crafts  and  the  most  pairt  of  the 
brethrein  of  counsell. 

The  said  day  the  forme  of  the  few  dispositioune  that  is  to  be  granted  to 
those  yt  fewes  the  land  at  Newport  wes  red  and  approven  off  as  also  some 
articles  for  preserving  the  burghs  priviledge  as  to  the  tred  and  merchandice 
qlk  ar  approven  be  the  magistrats  and  counsell  wcr  also  red  and  consented  to 
be  the  house. 


502 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1676 


P«fsons 
appoynted  to 
revise  the 
bands 

belonging  to 
the  house. 


The  same  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  did  represent  that  the  magistrats  and 
to\Mi  counsell  had  craved  ther  advj-ce  anent  the  exacting  of  ane  imposi~une 
wpon  brandie  vented  in  this  burgh  conforme  to  the  act  of  parUa'  the  samen 
wes  refeiTed  bak  be  y™  to  the  sd  town  counsell  to  doe  yrin  as  they  thought  fitt. 

The  sd  day  BailUe  Wallace  '.\'  the  deacon  cyvener  James  Colquhoun 
Johne  Hall  W™  Wallace  Patrick  Brjxe  malt,  deacons  of  hamermen  tailzeours 
and  the  remanent  deacons  ar  appojTited  to  revise  the  haill  bands  belonging 
to  the  house  and  those  qrof  the  piin'i  or  caul's  ar  deceast  or  q''  they  think  the 
securitie  not  sufficient  that  they  call  for  the  money  or  get  new  securitie. 


Bands  given  to 
the  collector. 


Eight  day  of  May  1676. 

Conveined  the  deacon  cyveiner  Baillie  Wallace  James  Colhoim 
Patrick  Bryce  malt,  with  the  haill  deacones  and  the  collector  except 
the  deacones  of  maissounes  and  bonetmakers  who  wer  absent. 

The  sd  day  the  fomamed  persons  did  revise  and  sight  the  haill  bands 
resting  to  the  house.  The  bands  following  wer  delyvered  the  collector  either 
to  get  paj-ment  or  new  securitie  viz  two  bands  resting  be  Ardincaple  and  his 
cau'"s  contening  two  thousand  ane  hundreth  merks  prin"  soume  Item  ane 
band  of  ane  thousand  merks  resting  be  Airdoch  and  his  caul's  Item  ane  band 
cytening  400  merk  resting  be  Andrew  Jlorsoune  and  his  caul's  Item  Hard- 
grays  band  of  300  merks  W™  \\'ardens  band  of  300  merks  v/  Gavine  \\'odells 
band  of  250  merks  W"  Thomsones  band  of  600  merk  and  M"'  Hugh  and  Johne 
Wallaces  band  of  1000  merk. 


Prcnteis 
Denestoun. 


Prenteis 
Wilsone. 


Item  ther  wer  some  old  bands  qlk  ar  desperat  debt  also  given  out  to  the 
collector  viz  ane  band  granted  be  v/  George  Lyoun  cowper  of  300  ll  Item 
ane  band  granted  be  Johne  Love  of  400  merks  qrin  W"  Love  skiner  and  \\''" 
W^atsone  fleshour  are  cautioners  Item  ane  other  band  granted  be  Johne  Love 
skiner  as  prin^'  and  Archbald  Cumyng  portioner  of  Polmadie  cautioners  of 
200  merks. 

Nyni  day  of  May  1676. 

The  sd  day  Andrew  Denestoun  is  booked  prenteis  w'  \\"^  Grahame  hamer- 
man  for  iyve  j-ears  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  indentour  dated  the  twentie 
sevint  day  of  Aprj'le  last. 

5  Jitnij  1676. 

Johne  Wilsone  sone  to  Johne  Wilsone  cordoimer  is  booked  as  he  who  is 
become  bound  as  prenteis  w*  W™  Fultoun  skiner  for  fyve  years  and  two  years 
for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  second  day  of  Feb^'i 
1676. 


1676]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  503 


7  JuUj  1676. 

The  same  day  James  Morisoune  sone  lau"  to  James  Morisoune  in  Craigend  Prcnteis 
is  booked  as  prenteis  with  W">  Muie  maltman  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat 
and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  14  Ja^'J  last. 


Morisoune. 


Nynt  of  August  1676. 

James  Hunter  sone  to  James  Hmiter  off""  is  booked  prenteis  \v'  Hugh  Prenteis 
Cumyng  tailzeour  for  fyve  years  as  prenteis  and  two  years  for  meat  and  lie  ^""'^'^• 
conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  eight  day  of  March  1676. 


Glasgow  twentie  two  day  of  August  1676. 

Conveined  in  the  crafts  hospitall  the  deacon  cyveiner  w*  Johne 
Hall  W™  Wallace  and  Patrick  Bryce  malt,  w*  the  deacones  of  crafts 
for  the  most  pairt  with  severall  oyrs  of  the  brethren  for  casting  wp 
of  the  Gorball  rent  the  cropt  1675. 

They  find  the  rent  the  sd  year  being  ane  hundreth  twentie  nyne  bolls  at  Extent 
elevine  pound  ten  shilling  the  boll  with  the  fourt  pairt  of  the  Gorball  teynds  ^'"'''^"  ''^"'■ 
the  minister  of  Govanes  stipend  being  rebaited  and  fourtie  shiling  for  the  box 
land  to  extend  to  in  haill  to  the  soume  of  ane  thousand  six  hundreth  sixtie 
four  pound  three  shihng  four  pennies  qlk  being  divyded  in  threttie  ane  pairts 
ther  falls  to  be  given  to  each  tred  conforme  to  the  thousand  merk  the  soume 
of  fyftie  three  pound  threttine  shiling  four  pennies  qlk  the  collector  is  appoynted 
to  pay  accordinghe  to  the  reptive  crafts  conforme  to  ther  interests. 


Alt  the  crafts  Hospitall  the  ellevint  day  of  October  1676. 

The  sd  day  James  Farie  deacon  conveiner  Johne  Miller  baillie  w'  the  Lyt  deacon 
deacons  of  craft  and  ther  brethren  of  counsell  being  conveined  for  electing  '=y^'""'='^- 
two  of  ther  number  to  be  presented  with  the  sd  James  Farie  to  the  proveist 
bailhes  and  counsell  of  the  sd  burgh  and  others  interested  to  the  effect  ane  of 
the  three  may  be  choysen  to  be  deacon  cyveiner  of  this  burgh  for  the  year 
enshewing  be  plurahtie  of  vots  Jolm  Hall  and  W"*  Wallace  wer  elected  to 
be  presented  w^  the  sd  James  Farie  to  the  effect  forsaid  and  ordanes  the  lyts 
to  be  presented  be  the  deacons  of  hamermen  and  tailzeours. 

The  same  day  the  sd  James  Farie  wes  continued  deacon  cyveiner  of  the 
sd  burgh  for  ane  year  to  come. 


504 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1676 


Counsellours 
swornc. 


Glasgow  the  twelfe  day  of  October  1676. 

Followes  the  names  of  these  who  ar  nominat  and  appoyntcd  to  be  members  and 
counsellours  of  the  crafts  house  for  the  year  to  come  and  first  the 
deacones  viz 


Alexander  Govane  deacon  of  hamennen 
\\m  Watsone  d.  of  tailzeours 
Johne  Wodrop  d.  of  cordouners 
Mathew  M^Aulay  visitor  of  maltmen 
M''  Charles  Mowat  visitor  of  chirurgianes 
W""  Glen  deacon  of  baxters 
Ro'  Flaickfeild  d.  of  weivers 


Hamermen 


Tailzeours 


Cordouners 


Maltmen 


Weivers 


James  Ker 
William  Grahame 
Patrick  M^^Ilvicar 
Geo.  Robiesone 
Ro*^  Telpher 

Johne  Miller  baillie 
Ar'^  Flemyng 
Androvv  Scot 
Simeon  Tennent 
Ro*  Thomson  e 

James  Thomsone 
James  Hutchesone 
Wm  Watsone 
Johne  Park 
James  Maxwell 

\Vm  Wallace 
Johne  Wallace 
Patrick  Bryce 
Ro*  Campbell 
Joline  Findlay 

Patrick  Lang 
Patrick  Bryce 
Robert  Gilmour 


Thomas  Miller  deacon  of  wrights 
Robert  Boyd  deacon  of  maissounes 
Johne  Padie  deacon  of  glovers 
Niniane  Patersone  d.  of  cowpers 
James  Gilmour  d.  of  fieshours 
Robert  Tennent  visitour  of  gairdiners 
Johne  Walker  d.  of  bonetmakers 


Chirurgianes 

Wrights 
Baxters 

Maissounes 
Glovers 

Cowpers 
Fleshours 


Joline  Hall 
Art!  Bogle 

James  Colquhoun 
W™  LideU 

Gavine  Hepbume 
Johne  Scot 

Thomas  Cauldwell  yo'' 
Johne  Gilhagie 

Ro*  Bogle 
CoUine  Crafourd 

W™  Sheills 
Ro*  Young 

James  Watsone 
Johne  Barie 


Bonetmakers    Niniane  Spence 

Gairdiners        Geo.  Ralstoun 
\\m  Hutchesone 


The  said  day  the  haill  fomamed  members  of  the  deacon  cyveiners  house 
compeired  and  gave  ther  oathes  of  fideUtic  except  these  following  who  wer 
absent   viz  Jolmc   Miller,   baillie,  James    Colquhoun  W"  Grahame  Patrick 


1676]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  505 

M<=Ilvicar  Ar<i  Flempig  Andrew  Scot  Ro'  Thomsone  James  Maxwell  Johne 
Flndlay  Ro'  F'laickfield  Patrick  Laiig  Patrick  Bryce  waiver  Colline  Crafourd 
W"'  Sheills  Ro'  Young  James  Gilmour  James  Watsone  Joline  Barie  W"^ 
Hutchesone  Niniane  Spence. 

The  sd  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  remanent  of  his  counsell  forsd  who 
wer  present  did  be  pluraUtie  of  vots  make  choyse  of  Johne  Hall  James  Colquhoun 
Win  Wallace  and  Patrick  Bryce  maltman  to  be  four  of  the  dean  of  gilds  brethrein 
for  keeping  of  his  courts  for  the  enshewing  year  and  appoynts  the  deacon 
cyveiner  to  present  them  as  vse  is. 

Glasgow  the  fyflein  day  of  December  1676. 

Conveined  in  the  crafts  hospitall  the  deacon  cyveiner  Baillie 
Miller  Johne  Hall  Patrick  Bryce  maltman  with  the  deacons  of  crafts 
and  ther  brethrein  of  counsell  who  wer  present  for  the  most  pairt. 

The  same  day  Baillie  Miller  Archbald  Flemyng  James  Maxwell  Jolin  Counseiioiirs 
Findlay   Robert    Flaickfeild    Patrick    Lang  ColUne  Crafourd   Robert   Young  J^vornT.  ^''^'"' 
James   Watsone    Joluie    Barrie  W"^   Hutchesone    Niniane    Spence    Patrick 
Mt^Ilvicar  and  Ro'  Campbell  being  formerlie  elected  counsellours  to  the  deacon 
cyveiner  gave  yr  oathes  of  fidehtie. 

The  said  day  ^^"illiam  Watsone  collector  to  the  crafts  house  made  his 
compt  of  his  intromissioune  with  the  rents  belonging  to  the  sd  house  the  last 
year  wherof  charge  and  discharge  is  as  followes  and  first  the  charge. 

Charge. 

Imprimis  the  compter  charges  himself  with  the  soume  following  y' 

wes  resting  in  his  hand  att  his  last  compt  making  extending  to 
Item  with  q'  he  receaved  from  Daniell  Purdoun  of  burgess  money  is 
Item  that  he  receaved  fra  James  Bogle  of  bucket  money 
Item  w'  q'  he  receaved  fra  Thomas  Leckie  for  ane  years  maill  of 

ane  heigh  house  qlk  belonged  to  James  Duncane  fra  Witsonday 

1675  to  Witsonday  1676       .  .  .  .  .       30    o 

Item  fra  James  Bowie  for  ane  laigh  house  of  the  said  land  the 

said    year  .  .  .  .  .  .       22    0 

Item  fra  Robert  Caruthers  and  his  tennents  as  ane  pairt  of  the 

bygone  maill  resting  out  of  his  land  in  Stockwallgate  11     0 

Item  fra  Johne  Adam  for  the  hospitall  yaird  fra  Mertimes  1675 

to    Mertimes    1676  .  .  .  .  .       16    o 

Item  with  q'  he  receaved  fra  the  Laird  of  Airdoch  for  ane  years 

arent  of  ane  thousand  merks  fra  Mertimes  1674  to  Mertunes 

1675  is  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       40    o 


H 

s. 

D. 

514 

I 

0 

28 

13 

0 

no 

0 

0 

5o6  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1676 

Item  fra  Alexander  Govane  hamerman  for  ane  year  arent  of  ane 

hundreth  merks  fra  Mertimes  1674  to  Mertimes  1675  .         400 

Item  fra  Archbald  Stewart  ane  years  arent  of  six  hundreth  and 

fj'ftie  merk  the  sd  year       .  .  .  .  .       26    o     o 

Item  fra  Johne  Otterbume  for  ane  years  arent  of  two  hundreth 

merks  fra  Candlemes  1675  to  Candlemes  1676  .  .800 

Item  fra  the  Laird  of  Hardgray  for  ane  year  and  halfe  years  arent 

of  three  hundreth  merks  fra  Mertimes  1674  to  VVitsonday 

1676  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       18    o    o 

Item  fra  W"  \\'airden  for  three  quarters  of  ane  years  arent  of 

three  hundreth  merks  fra  Lambes  1G75  to  Witsonday  1676  goo 
Item  fra  Johne  Wallace  for  ane  years  arent  of  ane  thousand  merks 

fra  Mertimes  1674  to  Mertimes  1675  .  .  .       40    o    o 

Item  fra  Andrew  Morsoune  for  two  years  arent  of  four  hundreth 

merks  fra  Witsonday  1674  to  Witsonday  1676        .  .       32    o    o 

Item  fra  W°i  Thomsone  in  Auchinaime  for  ane  years  arent  of  six 

hundreth  merks  fra  Lambes  1675  to  Lambes  1676    .  .       24     o     o 

Item  fra  Johne  Corse  wright  for  aire  years  arent  of  six  hundreth 

merks  fra  Mertimes  1674  to  Mertimes  1675  .  .       24     o     o 

Item  fra  James  Armour  younger  mer^i  ane  quarter  years  arent 

of  six  hundreth  merks  fra  Lambes  1676  to  Mertimes  1676  .  600 
Item  fra  Johne  Cumjng  maltman  aire  years  arent  of  fyve  hundreth 

merks  fra  Mertimes  1675  to  Mertimes  1676    .  .  .       20    o    o 

Item  fra  Thomas  Linning  htster  ane  years  arent  of  fourtein  hundreth 

merks  fra  Witsonday  1675  to  Witsonday  1676  years  .       56     0     0 

Item  fra  James  Man  wryter  ane  years  arent  of  ane  hundreth 

pounds  fra  Witsonday  1675  to  Witsonday  1676        .  .         600 

Item  fra  Joline  Findlay  maltman   for  ane  years  arent  of  fy\"e 

himdreth  merks  fra  Mertimes  1675  to  Mei-times  1676  .       20    0    o 

Item  fra  Patrick  Bryce  \\eiver  for  ane  years  arent  of  six  hundreth 

merks  fra  Mertimes  1674  to  Mertimes  1675  with  ane  years 

arent  of  fj^e  hundreth  merks  fra  15  of  Apryle  1675  to  the 

15  Apryle  1676  extending  both  to  .  .  .       44    0    o 

Item  fra  Thomas  Shearer  wryter  for  ane  years  arent  of  three 

himdreth  merks  fra  Mertimes  1674  to  Mertimes  1675  .       12     o     o 

Item  fra  Maister  Alexander  M^^Aulay  as  tutor  and  in  name  of 

young  Ardincaple  the  arent  of  ane  thousand  merks  fra  Lambes 

1675   to  Mertimes  1676     Item  the  iirent  of  fyve  hundreth 

merks  fra  Witsonday  1675  to  Mertimes  1676  and  the  arent 

of  six  hundreth  merks  fra  Lambes  1675  to  Mertimes  1676 

is  iir  all         .  .  .  .  .  •  .     no    o    o 

Item  fra  the  Laird  of  Airdoch  for  ane  years  arent  of  ane  thousand 

merks  scots  fra  Mertimes  1675  to  Mertimes  1676      .  .       40    o     0 


400 

0      0 

30 

0     o 

25 

0      0 

12 

0      0 

1676]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  507 

Item  receavcd  fra  the  Laird  of  Hardgray  the  priri"  soume  of 
three  hundreth  merks  at  Witsonday  1676  qlk  he  wes  resting 
inde  .......     200    o    o 

Item  at  the  sd  terme  fra  Patrick  Bryce  in  name  of  W"  Wairden 

of  prin"  soume         ......     200    o     o 

Item  at  the  sd  terme  fra  \V'"  Thomsone  iii  Auchinaime  of  prin'i 
soume  ....... 

Item  fra  James  Sheills  hamerman  resting  of  his  gildbrother  lyne 

Item  fra  Johne  Hoge  hamerman  as  the  last  pairt  of  his  gildbrother 
fyne  ....... 

Item  fra  James  Davidsone  as  ane  pairt  of  his  gildbrother  fyne 

Item  receaved  fra  him  for  raising  homing  against  him  the  rest  of 

the  expenss  being  payed       .  .  .  .  .300 

Item  fra  W"  Mershell  in  pairt  pay'  of  q*  he  rests  of  his  gildbrother 

iyne  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       13    6    8 

Item  fra  Johne  Gilespie  gairdiner  .  .  .  .       20    o    o 

Item  fra  Johne  Govane  wright  brandie  drawer  in  pairt  pay'  of  his 

gildrie  fj.-ne  .  .  .  .  .  .       50    o    o 

Item  fra  the  heretors  and  others  dew  and  lyable  to  the  crafts 
hospitall  for  the  small  few  dewties  the  year  1675  including 
the  los.  resting  out  of  James  Bells  the  year  1674      .  .       63  12     o 

Item  the  compter  charges  himselfe  with  the  house  pairt  of  the 
Gorballs  rent  the  cropt  1675  being  conforme  to  eight  thousand 
merks  at  53  ll  13s.  6d.  ilk  1000  merk    inde  .  .       429    8    o 

Item  fra  the  deacones  of  hamermen  weivers  tailzeours  baxters 
v-isitour  of  maltmen  chirurgianes  each  of  them  eight  pounds 
scots  being  new  deacones     inde        .  .  .  .       48     0     o 

Item  fra  the  haill  deacones  in  name  of  ther  reptive  crafts  that  they 

ar  dew  to  the  house  yearhe  conforme  to  vse  and  wont  .     209  13    4 

Suma  of  the  discharge  [?  charge]  is  .  .  .  2974  14    o 

Qlk  compt  abovewrin  being  read  calculat  and  laid  it  is  found  that  the 
charge  exceids  the  discharge  in  the  soume  of  six  hundreth  threttie  ane  pounds 
sixtein  shilling  two  pennies  scots  qlk  the  compter  is  ordaned  to  pay  to  the 
subsequent  collector  and  qrwith  he  is  to  be  charged  and  therfore  the  deacon 
cyveiner  and  haill  persones  conveined  exoners  and  discharges  be  thir  puts  the 
compter  of  his  haill  intromissioune  with  the  rent  of  the  house  conforme  to  the 
compt  abovewrin  he  paying  the  sd  rests  as  sd  is. 

The  sd  day  be  pluralitie  of  vots  Johne  Wodrop  deacon  of  the  cordouners  Wodrop 
wes  choysen  collector  to  the  crafts  house  for  ane  year  to  come  who  did  accept  coicctor. 
and  give  his  oath  of  fidelitie  as  vse  is. 


5o8  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1676 

Money  The  samen  day  ther  wes  produced  twentie  two  pound  twelfe  shilling  for 

the  last  years  burges  money  and  ane  hundreth  and  ten  pound  of  bucket  money 
qlk  wes  given  to  the  collector  and  qrwith  he  is  to  be  charged. 

Bands  pute  in  The  sd  day  ther  wes  produced  ane  band  granted  be  Thomas  Andersone 

the  box.  ,   ,  ■  c   c  1       ,         •  r        «»       •  1  IT-.., 

and  his  caul's  of  800  marks  beanng  arent  fra  Mertimes  last  with  Patrick 
McJlvicars  band  of  300  merk  bearing  arent  fra  Witsonday  last  and  W™ 
TumbuUs  band  of  300  merk  bearing  arent  fra  Witsonday  last  qlk  wer  pute 
in  the  box. 

Bands  given  to  The  same  day  Archbald  Maxwells  band  of  250  merk  James  Hamiltoimes 

band  of  57  ll  Gavine  Wodells  band  of  250  merk  bearing  arent  fra  Witsonday 
1671  and  resting  since  y'  tyme  with  Androw  Morsounes  band  of  400  merk 
wer  given  to  the  collector  to  wplift  the  money  or  get  new  securitie.  Item 
James  Crafourds  band  qrby  he  rests  ten  pound  William  Mershells  band  qrof 
ther  is  resting  twentie  pound  James  Davidsones  band  with  homing  and  captione 
yron  qrby  he  rests  40  li  and  Joline  Gilespies  band  qrby  he  rests  20  ti  wer  given 
to  the  collector  to  receave  the  money  and  qrv\ith  he  is  to  be  charged. 

Offer  of  30  lii'.  The  qlk  day  compeired  Robert  Flaickfeld  present  deacon  of  the  weivers 

acceptedTfiL"^  of  the  sd  burgh  with  severall  of  his  m's  of  craft  for  themselves  and  in 
name  of  ther  haill  tred  and  made  offer  j'earlie  to  be  payed  be  ye  sd 
tred  to  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones  and  ther  collector  of  the  soume 
of  threttie  pounds  yearlie  in  all  tyme  coming  for  the  vse  of  the  poore  of 
the  craftis  qras  thej'  payed  onUe  formerlie  fyftine  pounds  the  sd  deacon  of 
weivers  and  his  successors  in  office  getting  ane  kye  of  the  deacon  cyveiners 
lock  to  keep  as  other  deacones  gets  whilk  offer  wes  accepted  off  on  the  termes 
forsd  they  produceing  ane  act  of  ther  haill  calUng  at  thg  melting  of  the  deacon 
cyveiner  and  deacones  to  be  at  Hutchesones  hospitall  on  Monday  nixt  that 
they  obleige  yn^selves  to  pay  the  sd  threttie  pounds. 

The  sd  day  the  lyk  offer  wes  made  be  Gavine  Hepbume  Johne  Scot  Johne 
Buchannan  Daniell  Purdoun  W"  Crafourd  Jolme  Armour  Walter  Buchannan 
baxters  of  threttie  pounds  yearlie  to  be  payed  be  y"'  for  themselves  and  in 
name  of  the  haill  tred  without  seiking  any  kye  of  the  box  whilk  also  was 
accepted  off. 

Alt  Glasgow  the  cightein  of  December  1676. 

Conveined  in  Hutchesones  hospitall  the  deacon  cyveiner  Jo° 
Miller,  baillie,  Joline  Hall  W™  Wallace  Johne  \\'allace  late  baillies 
Patrick  Bryce  late  deacon  cyveiner  with  the  deacones  of  crafts  and 
these  who  wer  deacones  the  year  preceiding  who  for  the  most  pairt 
wer  present. 


1676]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  509 

The  said  clay  the  deacon  cyveiners  [?  deacon]  of  weivers  produced  ane  act 
made  with  consent  of  ther  haill  tred  of  the  date  the  eight  day  of  December 
instant  vTider  the  sublime  of  Patrick  Clerk  clerk  to  the  sd  calling  wherby  they 
obleige  themselves  to  pay  ycarlie  to  the  deacon  cyveiners  house  the  threttie 
pounds  offered  be  them  the  last  meitting  they  getting  ane  kye  of  the  deacon 
cyveiners  box  to  keep  and  getting  in  als  many  members  in  the  cyveiners  house 
as  the  rest  of  the  treds  hes  at  the  first  altera' une  of  the  house  and  to  [be] 
preferred  before  others  y'  payes  not  so  mutch  as  they  doe  whilk  offer  wes 
approven  off  and  ane  box  appoynted  to  be  made  with  six  kyes  with  all 
expeditione  y'  ane  yrof  may  be  given  to  be  keeped  be  the  deacon  of  weivers. 

The  sd  day  the  baxters  declared  that  they  had  made  ane  act  of  ther 
calling  dated  the  sixtein  of  this  instant  obleiging  themselves  and  ther 
successors  to  pay  the  threttie  pounds  yearhe  they  offered  to  the  deacon 
cyveiners  house  without  seiking  any  more  psones  on  the  hous  or  any  kye  of 
the  box  notwithstanding  it  is  concluded  y*  they  get  ane  of  kyes  of  the  box  to 
keep  if  they  pleis  to  accept  yroi. 

The  said  day  ordanes  the  collector  to  pay  to  the  poore  of  the  reptive  treds  Warrand 
the  soume  of  sex  hundreth  sex  pound  sevine  shillings  conforme  to  the  par-  '^°"^'='°''- 
ticular  list  set  doune  theranent  for  the  present  suphe. 

Glasgow  20  December  1676. 

The  said  day  Johne  Giffing  is  booked  as  prenteis  with  Johne  Mure  skiner  Prenteis 
for  the  space  of  fyve  years  and  two  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  '^'*^"S- 
dated  the  fyft  day  of  Junij  1676. 

22  December  1676. 

The  same  day  James  Maxwell  sone  to  Richard    Maxwell  indweller  in  Prenteis 
Glasgow  is  booked  as  prenteis  with  Hector  Langlands  skiner  for  sevine  years  "^'^"^^  ' 
and  two  for  meit  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  twentie  two  of 
FebriJ  1675. 

Glasgow  27  December  1676. 

James  Murdoch  sone  to  Johne  Murdoch  wxight  in  Litle  Govane  is  booked  Prenteis 
prenteis  with  Andrew  Scot  yo''  tailzeour  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat  and     ^^  °'^^' 
i\e  yr  indentour  dated  the  sevintein  day  of  May  1676. 

Twentie  nynt  of  December  1676. 

The  said  day  W™  Andersone  sone  to  W"  Andersone  in  Litle  Govane  is  Prenteis 
booked  as  prenteis  w'  James  Andersone  maltman   for  fyve  years  and  two  •'^"''^"°°^- 
years  yrefter  for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  fyftein 
day_|of  May  1676, 


5IO 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1676 


Prenteis 
Danizell. 


Corbet  and 

Robiesone 
fund  in  a 
wrong  and 
fvned. 


Glasgow  the  ihrettie  day  of  December  1676. 

The  said  day  Donald  Danzell  sone  to  James  Danzell  tailzeour  is  booked 
as  prenteis  with  Johne  Davidsone  armourer  for  six  years  and  ane  year  therefter 
for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  ther  indentonr  dated  the  first  day  of  September 
1676. 

Att  Glasgow  the  sevintein  day  of  Apryle  1677. 

The  qlk  day  being  conveined  in  the  crafts  hospitall  the  deacon  cyveiner 
w*  W"  Wallace  Jolme  \A'allace  Patrick  Bryce  malt,  and  the  deacones  of  tailzeours 
cordouners  visitour  of  malt,  baxters  skinners  cowpers  gairdiners  late  visitours 
of  chirurgianes  and  malt,  anent  ane  complaint  given  in  before  them  be  the 
visitour  of  maltmen  against  Peter  Corbet  and  Robert  Robiesone  two  of  ther 
owTie  calling  for  ther  vilipending  the  sd  calhng  and  incorpora~une  in  vseing 
severall  expressiones  against  them  and  saying  they  would  tak  prenteiss  and 
keep  y""  and  not  book  y™  in  the  callings  book  except  they  pleased  and  that 
they  wad  faine  sie  who  would  comand  them  to  doe  it  and  severall  other 
vnhandsome  expressiones  not  wortliie  to  be  named  conteined  in  the  bill  who 
being  present  denyed  the  samen  whervpon  witness  being  adduced  and  led  it 
wes  sufftcienthe  provine  for  qlk  ilk  ane  of  the  sds  Peter  Corbet  and  Ro'  Robiesone 
wer  fyned  and  vmlawed  in  tuentie  merkis  scots  to  be  payed  to  the  collector 
and  in  fourtie  shiling  scots  to  the  baillies  and  recomends  them  to  the  bailUes 
to  pute  J™  in  prisone  till  the  fyne  be  payed  and  farder  declaires  and  ordaines 
them  to  give  satisfactione  to  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones  and  the 
visitour  of  maltmen  and  his  mi's  till  qch  tyme  it  is  declared  that  [they]  ar  nether 
to  have  ane  vott  nor  be  votted  in  yr  calling  and  also  declares  that  Robert 
Robiesone  is  ne\'er  to  \'ott  or  be  votted  till  he  mak  the  four  thousand  merks 
appear  misguyded  by  ther  calling  qlk  he  sd  they  had  done. 


At  Glasgow  29  of  May  1677. 

The  said  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones  and  severall  oy''^  of  ther 
brethrein  of  counsell  being  conveined  and  it  being  comouned  that  the  deacon 
cyveiner  and  some  of  ther  number  had  mett  severall  tymes  with  Johne 
Hutchesone  anent  the  buying  of  some  of  his  lands  for  the  vse  of  the  house 
and  poore  yrin  qlk  being  taken  to  ther  considera^ime  and  y*  at  ever  occasione 
yt  might  fall  in  concerning  y'  occasione  it  wes  impossible  to  get  the  deacones 
and  the  house  conveined  they  did  therfore  nominat  and  appoynt  the  deacon 
cyveiner  Jolme  and  W"  Wallaces  Johne  Miller,  bailhe,  Jolme  Hall  and  Patrick 
Bryce  with  the  deacones  of  hamermen  tailzeours  cordoimers  and  visitour  of 
maltmen  and  any  fyve  of  the  sds  psones  to  be  ane  quorum  to  buy  q'  of  Auchin- 
grayes  lands  they  thought  most  fitt  for  the  vse  of  the  crafts  house  or  any  other 
bargane  of  land  equivalent  to  the  money  the  house  had  to  pay  for  it. 


1677]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  511 

Ellcvint  of  May  1677. 

Malcome  Fergussone  sone  to  Johne  Fergusone  in  Greinsyd  is  booked  as  Prenteis 
prenteis  with  \\'illiam  Ferguson  tailzeour  for  fyve  years  and  t\\o  for  meat  and 
fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  tent  day  of  May  1677. 


Fergusone. 


13  Junij  1677. 

The  same  day  Johne  Buntein  is  booked  as  prenteis  w'  Johne  Scot  yo''  Prenteis 
tailzeour  for  fyve  years  and  two  yrefter  for  meat  and    fie  conforme  to  the 
indentour  dated  the  sd  13  of  Junij  instant. 

Alt  Glasgow  (he  (  ). 

The  qlk  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  with  W'"  Wallace  Patrick  Bryce  malt.  Papers  taken 
with  the  deacones  of  crafts  and  ther  brethrine  of  counsell  who  for  the  most  box  and  put  in 
pairt  wer  present  being  conveined  in  the  crafts  hospitall  they  did  change  the  '^"^  "'^^^  ^°^' 
papers  and  wxyts  belonging  to  the  house  out  of  the  old  box  and  pute  them  in 
ane  new  made  box  qlk  hes  eight  kyes  qrof  four  kyes  \\'ithout  and  four  within  for 
two  shotles  off  the  qlk  kyes  on  wes  delyvered  to  the  deacones  of  hamerman 
ane  to  the  deacon  of  tailzeours  ane  other  to  the  visitour  of  malt,  and  on  to 
the  deacon  of  cordouners  who  keeped  the  kyes  formerlie  and  other  two  of 
them  given  to  the  deacones  of  baxters  and  weivers  who  ar  to  pay  to  the  house 
each  of  y™  threttie  pounds  in  tyme  coming  and  the  other  two  kyes  ar  laid  in 
the  box. 

The  samen  day  tlie  hamermen  and  cordouners  made  offer  and  obleiged  Money  payed 
themselves  to  pay  to  the  house  yearlie  each  of  them  fourtie  li  scots  q''as  for-  yeariie  °"^^ 
merlie  they  payed  bot  threttie  pound  and  the  tailzeours  to  pay  fyftie  pound  augmented  be 
yearhe  wheras  before  only  threttie  and  the  maltmen  to  pay  the  lyk  as  the  crafts. 
tailzeours. 


The  sd  day  the  old  box  qrin  the  papers  wer  wes  given  to  the  weivers  to  Old  box  given 
keep  yr  papers.  ]^^^^^, 

Alt  Glasgow  the  twentie  sevint  day  of  Julij  1677. 

Conveined  in  the  crafts  hospitall  the  deacon  cyveiner  with  Johne 
Miller  baillie  William  Wallace  late  bailhe  and  the  deacones  of  crafts 
with  the  most  pairt  of  ther  brethrein  of  counsell. 

The  qlk  day  the  fomamed  persones  conveined  having  considered  the  .A.nent  the 
lands  of  Auchingray  Caldercruiks  and  Auldhouse  bought  fra  Johne  Hutchesone  ^^^^^  bought 
for  fourtie  fyve  thousand  merks  and  fj've  hundreth  merks  referred  in  the  buyers  Auchingray. 
will  farder  and  also  having  considered  that  the  house  hes  not  money  for  paying 
the  haill  bargane  and  sua  behoved  to  quate  ane  pairt  therof  \\'nto  qch  it  wes 


512 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1677 


ansered  be  James  Farie  deacon  cyveiner  that  he  sould  be  content  to  accept 
of  the  lands  of  Auldhouse  for  eightein  thousand  merks  qlk  being  comoimed 
and  anent  the  gi^eat  paines  taking  be  the  sd  James  in  making  of  the  bargane 
and  having  pute  the  samen  to  ane  vott  of  the  haill  house  it  wes  conckided  that 
the  sd  James  Farie  sould  have  the  sds  lands  of  Auldhouse  with  the  pertinents 
for  the  sd  soume  of  eighteen  thousand  merks  and  that  they  would  keep  the 
lands  of  Auchingray  and  Caldercruiks  for  the  vse  of  the  poore  in  the  house  at 
tuentie  sevine  thousand  merks  and  allowed  and  aproved  of  the  bargane  and 
appoynts  the  rights  to  be  drawne  wp. 

Collector  to  jj^e  s(j  (j^y  i]^q  collector  is  appoynted  to  provyd  money  and  pay  the 

money.  charges  and  expenss  of  these  y'  went  to  Ed""  be  ordour  of  the  comittee  to  advyse 

the  securitie  of  the  lands  of  Auchingray  and  defray  other  charges  anent  the 

bargane. 


Prenteis 
Hunter. 


3  of  August  1677. 

Johne  Hunter  sone  to  James  Hunter  maltman  is  booked  as  he  who  is 
prenteis  w'  Johne  Philpshill  tailzeour  for  fyve  year  and  two  year  therefter  for 
meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  twentie  eight  day  of  May 
last. 


Att  Glasgow  the  tent  day  of  August  1677. 

Conveined  in  the  crafts  hospitall  the  deacon  cyveiner  Johne  and 
\V"^  Wallaces  with  the  deacones  of  crafts  and  ther  brethrein  of  counsell. 

The  qlk  day  the  dispositioune  of  the  lands  of  Auchingray  and  Calder- 
cruiks w'  the  pertinents  sub'  be  Johne  Hutchesone  in  favors  of  the  crafts 
house  and  the  poore  therin  wes  produced  with  ane  chartour  of  the  sds  lands 
and  ane  assigna^une  to  the  reversiones  of  the  wadsetts  on  the  sds  lands  whilks 
wer  read  and  the  bargane  \Tianimouslie  approven  off. 


B.ind  sub'  to 
Auchingray. 


The  same  day  ther  was  ane  band  sub'  by  the  haill  fomamed  persones  in 
favors  of  Auchingray  for  q'  rests  of  the  pryce  of  the  sd  land  the  pryce  agreed 
for  being  tuentie  sevine  thousand  merks  by  and  attour  fyve  hundreth  merks 
qlk  wes  referred  in  will  that  is  to  be  given  to  Anna  Hutchesone  of  the  qlk  pryce 
ther  is  payed  to  Auchingray  three  thousand  and  nyne  hundreth  merks  and 
nyne  hundreth  merks  qlk  be  great  paines  taking  Auchingray  is  perswaded 
to  given  doun  for  help  to  defrey  the  expenss  of  the  securitie  and  charges  in 
making  the  bargane  qlk  is  in  all  four  thousand  and  eight  hundreth  merks  sua 
the  soume  resting  for  the  qlk  the  band  is  sub'  extends  to  (  ). 


Warrand  jj^g  gj^jj  ^^,,  ordaines  tlie  collector  to  have  ane  warrand  for  the  sd  soume 

coUectur  and  -' 

power  to  of  three  thousand  and  n^ne  hundreth  merks  payed  to  Auchingray  in  pairt 

money.  pay'  of  the  sds  lands  and  in  respect  that  some  of  the  mone}'  above  two  thousand 


1677]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  513 

merks  is  borrowed  for  paying  the  sd  Auchingray  and  that  the  deacon  cyveiner 
and  collector  hes  given  band  therfore  in  name  of  the  haill  house  the  sds  haill 
fomamed  psones  allowes  and  approv-es  of  q'  money  is  borrowed  wpon  the 
accompt  of  the  sd  bargane  and  obleiges  them  and  ther  successors  in  office  to 
pay  the  samen  and  heirby  grantis  full  power  and  comissioune  to  the  deacon 
cyveiner  and  collector  to  give  bands  in  the  name  of  the  haill  house  for  q*  more 
money  sail  be  found  necessar  to  borrow  farder  the  collector  alwayes  being 
comptable  yrfore. 

The  samen  day  ordanes  the  collector  to  have  ane  warrand  for  three  Warrand 
hundreth  sixtein  pound  fyve  shilling  two  pennies  deburst  for  the  deacon  *^°  ^'^  °'^' 
cyveiner  and  clerks  expenss  and  ther  horse  hyrs  in  goeing  to  Ed''  to  advyse 
the  securitie  of  the  lands  of  Auchingray  and  Caldercruiks  and  given  to  advocats 
and  ther  servands  at  advyseing  therof  and  for  looking  out  of  inhibi^unes  and 
homings  against  Auchingray  and  spent  be  these  y'  wer  at  the  severall  meatings 
with  Auchingray  at  the  making  of  the  bargane. 

The  same  day  Baillie  Miller  the  deacon  cyveiner  Johne  and  W"  Wallaces  Persones 
Alex""  Govane  deacon  of  hamermen  W'"  \\'atsone  deacon  of  tailzeours  Mathow  concerning  the 
M'^Aulay  visitour  of  maltmen  with  the  deacones  of  cordouners  maissounes  'i'"'^u°* 

■'  Auchingray 

baxters  and  weivers  ar  nominat  and  appoynted  to  choyse  some  of  ther  number  and 
with  the  clerk  to  get  ther  right  of  the  lands  of  Auchingray  and  Caldercruiks 
confirmed  be  the  excheckquher  and  to  provyd  money  for  doeing  the  samen 
as  also  thes  samen  psones  ar  comissionat  to  meat  and  ordour  satisfactione  to 
be  given  to  Johne  Crafourd  wryter  for  his  paines  taking  and  helping  to  mak 
the  bargane  with  Auchingray  and  finding  out  some  papers  relating  to  y'  afifair. 

The  said  day  James  Crafourd  is  booked  prenteis  w*  James  Weir  v\eiver 
for  six  years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  ther  indentour  is  dated  the  twentie  day 
of  Nor  1673. 

Glasgow  23  of  August  1677. 

The  sd  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  with  Baillie  Miller  and  the  deacones  of  Ventirdaiiis 
craft  and  ther  brethrein  of  counsell  being  con  veined  anent  the  rooping  of  sevine  Hutchesone. 
hundreth  and  fyftie  daills  fallen  to  the  house  pairt  of  ane  parcell  made  offer 
of  be  James  Slos  in  name  of  Sir  Walter  Seatoune  who  efter  lau"  rowping  therof 
they  wer  sold  to  W™  Hutchesone  gardiner  for  pay'  of  fyftie  fyve  pound  and 
ten  shilling  the  hundreth  to  be  payed  at  the  receapt  and  ordanes  the  collectour 
to  pay  James  Slos  and  to  hold  compt  for  the  superplus. 

The  samen  day  these  who  wer  comissionat  be  the  haill  house  con  forme  P<^''sones 
to  the  act  of  the  date  the  tent  of  August  last  did  nominat  James  Farie  deacon  get  the 
cyveiner  or  ony  he  pleases  to  repair  to  Ed'  w'  the  clerk  at  any  tyme  they  think  ^""^""ands  of 
fittest  for  confirming  the  crafts  in  the  lands  of  Auchingray  and  Caldercruiks.  Auchingray 


21 


past. 


514  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1677 


Warrand 
collector. 


The  sd  day  the  sd  comittie  conforme  to  ther  comissioune  did  ordaine  twentie 
iyve  pound  sterling  to  be  given  to  Johne  Crafourd  wryter  for  finding  out  some 
papers  y'  wer  wanting  relaiting  to  the  bargane  \v'  Auchingray  and  other  his 
paines  taking  in  helping  to  agree  the  same  and  ordaines  the  collector  to  have 
ana  warrand  for  paying  the  sd  soume. 


Warrand 
collector. 


Extent 
Gorball  rent 
cropt  1676. 


Ati  Glasgow  the  eightein  day  of  September  1677. 

Convened  in  Hutchesones  hospitall  the  deacon  cyveiner  Baillie 
Miller  W"*  Wallace  w'  the  deacones  of  hamermen  tailzeours  cord- 
ouners  visitour  of  maltmen  deacones  of  baxters  WTights  skiners 
weivers  cowpers  fleshours  with  the  late  deacones  of  hamermen  tailzeours 
weivers  skiners  and  severall  others  of  yr  brethrein  of  counsell. 

The.  said  day  the  foniamed  persones  having  considered  the  mutch  trouble 
and  paines  George  Andersone  ther  clerk  hes  bein  att  in  the  bargane  bought 
fra  Auchingray  and  the  many  meittings  he  hes  keeped  yranent  and  for  drawing 
the  rights  and  securities  therof  and  for  his  pames  in  goeing  to  Ed'"  to  advyse 
the  samen  they  have  appojTited  him  to  have  twentie  fyve  pound  sterling  for 
his  sd  panes  and  trouble  and  ordaines  the  collector  to  pay  to  the  sd  George 
the  sd  soume  qlk  sail  be  allowed  to  him  at  his  compt  making  als  also  ordanes 
the  collector  to  give  to  James  Hutchesone  cordouner  fyve  poimd  sterling  for 
his  paines  takene  in  helping  to  mak  the  sd  bargane. 

The  said  day  the  foniamed  persones  being  converned  for  casting  wp  the 
crafts  pairt  of  the  Gorball  rent  the  cropt  1676  they  find  the  samen  conforme 
to  the  new  taks  set  to  the  tennents  to  extend  to  ane  hundreth  fourtie  eight 
bolls  three  pecks  and  ane  foiirt  pairt  peck  bear  qlk  conforme  to  the  fear  being 
fyve  pound  three  shilling  four  pennies  the  boll  extends  to  sevine  hundreth 
sixtie  eight  pound  six  shilling  and  two  pennies  and  the  crafts  pairt  of  the 
Gorball  tejmds  the  sd  year  the  minister  of  Govanes  stipend  being  payed  extends 
to  ane  hmidreth  threttie  four  pound  six  shilling  and  eight  pennies  with  fourtie 
shilling  for  the  boatih  land  qlk  maks  in  all  nj-ne  himdreth  four  pound  twelfe 
shilling  ten  pennies  which  soume  being  divyded  in  threttie  ane  pairts  ther 
falls  to  [be]  divyded  amongs  the  reptive  treds  for  ilk  thousand  merk  conforme 
to  ther  proportiones  twentie  njnie  pound  four  shilling  qlk  the  collector  is 
appojTited  to  pay  accordinglie. 


Att  the  crafts  hospitall  the  tent  day  of  October  1677. 

The  qlk  day  James  Farie  deacon  cyveiner  with  Joline  Hall  W'"  and  Johne 
Wallaces  late  baiUies  with  the  deacons  of  crafts  and  ther  brethren  of  the 
cyvemers  house  being  conveined  for  choysing  three  of  ther  number  to  be 
presented  to  the  proveist  bailhes  and  counsell  of  Glasgow  and  others  interested 


i677l 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


515 


to  the  effect  ane  of  y"'  may  be  choysen  to  bear  office  as  deacon  cyveiner  of 
the  sd  burgh  for  the  enshewing  year  qlk  being  voted  be  pluralitie  of  vots  Johne 
Hall  W""  Wallace  late  baillies  and  ^^''"  Watsone  tailzeour  wer  clioysen  to  the 
effect  forsd  and  ordaines  the  lyts  to  be  presented  be  the  deacons  of  hamermen 
and  tailzeours. 

The  samen  day  W""  Watsone  was  elected  deacon  cyveiner  of  the  sd  burgh 
for  ane  j'ear  to  come. 


AU  Glasgow  the  cllevint  day  of  October  167S  [  ?  1677]. 

Followes  the  names  of  these  who  ar  nominat  and  elected  to  be  members  of  the 
deacon  cyveiners  house  for  ane  year  to  come  and  first  the  deacones. 


James  Ker  deacon  of  hamermen 
James  Stevine  d.  of  tailzeours 
Johne  Wodrop  d.  of  cordouners 
Mathow  M'^Aulay  visitor  of  malt. 
Patrick  Lang  d.  of  weivers 
James  Maissoun  d.  of  baxters 
Ro'  Houstoun  visitor  of  chirurgianes 


Ro'  Bogle  d.  of  skiners 
Geo.  Drew  d.  of  WTights 
Ro'  Boyd  d.  of  maissounes 
James  Sheills  d.  of  cowpers 
James  Watsone  d.  of  fleshours 
Johne  Gilespie  visitor  of  gairdners 
Johne  Walker  d.  of  bonetmakers 


Hamermen 


James  Farie 
Alexander  Govane 
Wm  Grahame 
Geo.  Robiesone 
Robert  Telfer 


Baxters 


Wm  Glen 
Johne  Scot 


Tailzeours 


Johne  Miller 
Simeon  Tennent 
Jolme  Dalrj'mple 
Archbald  Flemyng 
Robert  Thomsone 


Chirurgianes     Johne  Hall 

]\f  Charles  Mowat 


Skiners 


Johne  Padie 
\\""'  Govane 


Cordouners 


James  Thomsone 
James  Hutchesone 
Johne  Park 
W'"  Watsone 
James  Maxwell 


Wrights 


Maissounes 


Cowpers 


James  Colquhoun 
Alexander  Ross 

Patrick  Maxwell 
Johne  Boyd 


Ro'  Young 
Johne  Nisbit 


5i6 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1677 


Maltmen 


Weivers 


\Vm  ^^'allace 
Johne  Wallace 
Johne  Findlay 
Johne  Robiesone 
Ro«  Boyd 

Rot  Flaickfeild 
Rot  Gilmour 
Johne  Clerk 


Fleshours 


Gairdiners 


James  Gilmour 
Johne  Barrie 


Robert  Tennent 
Johne  M^Kie 


Bonnetmakers  Thomas  Nasmith 


The  sd  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  being  conveined  in  the 

with  the  haill  fomamed  persones  elected  counsellours  who  [gave  their]  oathes 
except  James  Colquhoun  W™  Grahame  Geo.  [Robiesone]  Joline  Miller  Simeon 
Tennent  Ro*  Thomsone  James  Thomsone  W™  [Glen]  Jolme  Barrie. 

The  sd  day  George  Andersone  was  continowed  clerk. 

The  same  day  the  fomamed  persones  made  choyse  of  James  Farie  Johne 
Hall  W™  Wallace  Johne  Wodrop  to  sitt  on  the  dean  of  gilds  court  for  the 
year  to  cume. 

23  November  1677. 
The  same  day  James  Coalheuher  sone  to  v/  Abrahame  Coalhewher  is 
booked  as  prenteis  with  Alexander  Govane  hamerman  for  fyve  years  and  two 
for  meat  and  fie  conforme  to  the  indentour  dated  the  twentie  of  this  instant. 

29  iVc  1677. 
Johne  Stirling  sone  to  Ar"*  Stirling  in  Gamekirk  is  booked  as  prenteis 
w*  W""  Litlejohne  malt,  for  fyve  years  and  two  for  meat  and  fie  conforme 
to  the  indentour  dated  the  twentie  first  of  Junij  1675. 

Glasgow  the  fourt  day  of  Januarij  1678. 
The  qlk  day  the  deacon  cyveiner  w'  James  Farie  Johne  Hall  Jo"  and  W™ 
Wallaces  and  the  deacones  of  crafts  with  the  most  pairt  of  ther  brethrein  of 
counsell  being  conveined  in  the  crafts  hospitall  Johne  Wodrop  made  his  compt 
of  his  intromissioune  with  the  rent  belonging  to  the  crafts  hospitall  this  last 
year  and  of  q*  money  wes  borrov\ed  for  ther  behove  wherof  charge  and  dis- 
charge is  as  foUowes  and  first  the  charge. 

Charge. 

Imprimis  the  compter  charges  himselfe  with  q'  he  receaved 
fra  the  last  collector  y'  wes  resting  in  his  hands  at  his 
compt  making  is  .....     0631     16  02 

Item  with  what  he  receaved  of  burges  money  for  the  last  year    0022     12  00 


1678I        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  517 

Item  with  q'  he  rcceaved  for  bucket  money    .  .  .  oiio     00     00 

Item  fra  Thomas  Leckie  for  the  maill  of  ana  heigh  house  of 

James  Duncanes  land  fra  Witsonday  1676  to  Witsonday  1677  0030    00    00 

Item  fra  James  Bowie  for  ane  laich  house  of  the  sd  land  the 

sd  year     .......  0022     00    00 

Item  fra  Androw  Black  for  ane  years  rent  of  y*  house  qlk  belongs 

to  the  hospitall  fra  Wit.  1675  to  Wit.  1676  .  .  0029    00    00 

Item  w'  q'  he  receaved  fra  Jolme  Adame  for  the  rent  of  ane 

yaird  belonging  to  the  house  fra  Mert.  1676  to  M.  1677    .   0016     00     00 

Item  w*  qt  he  receaved  fra  James  Cunynghame  for  ane  laigh 
house  of  v/  Thomas  Linings  land  15  li  los.  and  fra  Johne 
Dunlop  for  ane  laigh  bak  house  10  li  and  fra  Christiana 
Andersone  for  ane  heigh  bak  house  9  li  and  fra  Jonet 
Cunynghame  for  ane  heigh  house  of  the  sds  lands  12  li 
being  for  halfe  ane  year  fra  Witsonday  1677  to  Mertimes 
1677  is  in  all  .  .  .  .  .  .  0046     10     00 

Item  receaved  fra  W™  Watsone  as  ane  pairt  of  his  gildbroy'' 
fyne  66  li  13s.  4d.  and  fra  Peiter  Corbet  of  his  gildbroy' 
fjTie  100  li  and  fra  Ro'  Stirhng  of  his  f}Tie  80  li  and  fra  W™ 
Merschell  as  ane  p*  of  his  10  li  and  fra  Jo"  Gilespie  as  ane 
p'  of  his  gildbrother  fyne  10  li  is  in  all       .  .  .   0266     13     04 

Item  the  compter  charges  himselfa  w'  q'  he  receaved  fra  Androw 

Morsone  y*  he  wes  resting  to  the  house  be  band    .  .  0266     13    04 

Item  receaved  fra  (  )  Hamiltoun  y'  he  wes  resting 

be  band  on  the  accompt  of  Johne  Govane  .  .  0057     00    00 

Item  fra  Johne  Gilhagie  y'  wes  resting  to  the  house  be  vmq" 
Gavine  Wodell  as  prin"  and  him  as  cau''  be  yr  band 

Item  fra  Thomas  Shearer  of  prin"  soume 

Item  fra  Ar''  Maxwell  y'  he  wes  resting  be  band 

Item  fra  Patrick  Bryce  weiver  in  pairt  pay'  of  q'  he  is  resting 
be  his  band  ...... 

Item  fra  Joline  Otterburne  wright  of  prin"  soume 

Item  fra  the  deacones  of  skinners  and  wrights  ilk  of  y™  eight 

pound  is  ......  0016     00     00 

Item  w'  qt  he  receaved  for  the  treds  pairt  of  the  ventir  daills 
belonging  to  y™  y'  wes  bought  be  W""  Hutchesone  that 
he  gave  for  the  vse  of  the  poore  in  the  house  is 

Item  the  house  pairt  of  the  Gorball  rent  the  cropt  1676 

Item  the  few  dewties  belonging  to  the  house  the  year  1676 

Item  the  fyne  y'  wes  taken  fra  James  Maissone  baxter 

Item  of  f^Tie  taken  fra  Peiter  Corbet  maltman 

Item  receaved  fra  Alex'  Govane  for  two  years  arent  of  100 

merk  fra  Mertimes  1675  to  Mer.  1677      .  .  .  0008    00    00 


0166 

13 

04 

0200 

00 

00 

0166 

00 

00 

0133 

06 

08 

0133 

06 

08 

0063 

09 

06 

0233 

12 

00 

0063 

12 

00 

0013 

06 

08 

0013 

06 

08 

5i8 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[1678 


Item  fra  Ai<^  Stewart  for  ane  years  arent  of  six  hundrethe  and 

fyftie  merk  fra  Mertimes  1675  to  M.  1676 
Item  fra  Androw  Morsoune  y''  he  wes  resting  of  the  arent  of  his 

prin^'  soume  of  400  merk  .... 

Item  fra  Johne  C\mi>-ng  for  ane  years  arent  of  fyve  hundrethe 

merks  fra  Mertimes  1676  to  Mer.  1677 
Item  fra  Thomas  Shearer  for  ane  year  and  halfe  years  arent  of 

300  merk  fra  Mertimes  1675  to  Wit.  1677 
Item  fra  James  Mann  for  ane  years  arent  of  100  li  fra  Witsonday 

1676  to  Wit.  1677  ..... 

Item  fra  Patrick  Bryce  waiver  for  two  years  arent  of  six  hundreth 

merks  fra  Mertimes  1675  to  M.  1677 
Item  fra  Johne  GiUiagie  for  six  years  arent  of  two  himdreth 

and  fyftie  merks  fra  Witsonday  1671  to  Witsonday  1677 
Item  fra  W™  Andersone  for  two  years  arent  of  fyve  hundreth 

merks  fra  Witsonday  1675  to  \Mt.  1677    . 
Item  fra  W"^  Tumbull  for  ane  years  arent  of  300  merk  fra  Wit- 

sondaj'  1676  to  Wit.  1677 
Item  fra  Patrick  M'^Ilvicar  for  ane  years  arent  of  300  merk  fra 

\Mt.  1676  to  Wit.  1677  .... 

Item  fra  Johne  Otterbume  for  ane  j'ear  and  ellevine  quarters 

arent  of  200  merk  preceiding  Jan''iJ  1678 
Item  w*  q'  he  receaved  fra  the  hamermen  tred  for  the  first  half 

of  the  last  year      ...... 

Item  fra  them  for  the  last  halfe  year    .... 

Item  fra  the  tailzeours  for  the  first  halfe  of  the  last  yea.T 
Item  fra  y™  for  the  last  halfe  yrof       .... 

Item  fra  the  cordormers  for  the  first  halfe  of  the  sd  j'ear 
Item  fra  y™  for  the  last  halfe  jTof      .... 

Item  fra  the  maltmen  for  the  first  halfe  year    . 

Item  for  the  last  halfe  year      ..... 

Item  fra  the  weivers  for  the  last  haill  year 

Item  fra  the  baxters  the  sd  year  .... 

Item  fra  the  skiners  the  first  halfe  year 

Item  fra  y™  the  last  halfe  year  .... 

Item  fra  the  wrights  the  first  halfe  j'ear 

Item  fra  y™  the  last  halfe  year  .... 

Item  fra  the  cowpers  the  first  halfe  year 

Item  fra  y"  the  last  halfe  year  .... 

Item  fra  the  fleshours  the  first  halfe  year 

Item  fra  them  the  last  halfe  year       .... 

Item  fra  the  chirurgianes  first  halfe  year 

Item  fra  them  the  last  halfe  year         .... 


0026 

00 

00 

0014 

00 

00 

0020 

00 

00 

0018 

00 

00 

0006 

00 

00 

0048 

00 

00 

oo5o 

00 

00 

0040 

00 

00 

0012 

00 

00 

0012 

00 

00 

0015 

06 

08 

0015 

00 

00 

0020 

00 

00 

0015 

00 

00 

0025 

00 

00 

0015 

00 

00 

0020 

00 

00 

0015 

00 

00 

0025 

00 

00 

0030 

00 

00 

0030 

00 

00 

0006 

00 

00 

0010 

00 

00 

0005 

00 

00 

0010 

00 

00 

0005 

00 

00 

0009 

00 

00 

0005 

00 

00 

0008 

00 

00 

0003 

06 

08 

0005 

00 

00 

0003 

o6 

o8 

0005 

00 

00 

0003 

o6 

o8 

ooo6 

13 

04 

0002 

13 

04 

13 
06 

04 
08 

13 

04 

06 

08 

00 

00 

13 

04 

1678]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  519 

Item  fra  tlie  gairdiners  first  halfe  j'ear 

Item  fra  them  last  halfe  year  .... 

Item  fra  the  maissounes  first  halfe  year 

Item  fra  y™  last  halfe  year  .... 

Item  fra  the  bonnetmakers  the  last  year 

Item  he  charges  himself e  w'  q'  wes  borrowed  fra  Geo.  Andersone 

qch  bears  iirent  fra  Wit.  last  1677  extending  to    .  .   0666     13     04 

Item  w'  q'  wes  borrowed  fra  Ro'  Boyd  bearing  arent  since 

Lambes  last  ......  0666 

Item  borrowed  fra  W'"  Watsone  bearing  arent  since  Lambes  last  0533 
Item  fra  Jo°  SpreuUs  airs  bearing  arent  since  Mer.  last  .  0666 

Item   fra  Michaell  Gilmours   relict   bearing  arent  since  Mer. 

last  .......  0333 

Item  fra  Ro'  Boyd  bearing  arent  since  Mertimes  1677  .  0800 

Item  fra  Geo.  Andersone  bearing  arent  since  Mer.  last  77        .   0666 

Suma  of  the  charge  is     .  .  .  .   7678     05     00 

Discharge. 

Imprimis  given  to  the  poore  of  the  severall  treds  be  warrand 

of  the  deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones  .  .   0606     07     06 

Item  to  the  six  old  men  in  the  house  each  halfe  quarter  6  li  since 

December  15  1676  till  the  15  December  1677 
Item  for  elevine  monethes  coalls  to  y'"  at  30s.  p.  moneth  is 
Item  for  6  pair  shoes  to  y™  at  30s.  the  pair 
For  12  shirts  to  y"  at  23s.  4d.  the  peice  is      . 
Item  be  ordour  of  the  deacon  cyveiner  to  bury  a  poore  man 
Item  be  the  sd  ordour  to  on  named  Clerk 
Item  to  ane  other  poore  man  .... 

Item  to  Gabriell  CunjTighame  and  the  poor  in   Hutchesones 

hospitall  ......  0001     04     00 

Item  to  Ro'  Andersone  off'^  be  ordour  of  the  cyveiner  and 

deacones  ..... 

Item  be  the  sd  ordour  to  Johne  Bell     . 
Item  to  the  toun  off''^  that  warned  Geo.  Linings  tennents 
Item  to  Gabriell  Cunynghame 

Item  to  the  off''^  y'  attended  the  cyveiner  at  the  electioune 
Item  for  cloathes  to  the  off  and  furnishing  and  making 
Item  to  the  factor  of  the  coUedge  for  M''  Huiesones  bursar 
Item  to  Alex''  Govane  for  the  iron  work  of  the  box 
Item  to  Thomas  Millers  rehct  for  the  timber  work  yrof 
Item  to  W'"^  Mitchell  for  ane  years  arent  of  1400  merk  fra  Wit- 

sonday  1676  to  Wit.  1677  ....  0056    00    00 


0288 

00 

00 

0016 

10 

00 

0009 

00 

00 

0014 

00 

00 

0002 

16 

00 

0002 

18 

00 

0001 

06 

oS 

0012 

00 

00 

0002 

18 

00 

0000 

12 

00 

0000 

12 

00 

0001 

16 

00 

0030 

15 

10 

0066 

13 

04 

0024 

00 

00 

0024 

00 

00 

0026 

13 

04 

0024 

00 

00 

0020 

00 

00 

.  2600   00 

00 

.  o666  13 

04 

.  0066  13 

04 

.  013  .. 

.  0004  . . 

.  0384  .. 

.  0060  00 

00 

520  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.       [1678 

Item  to  the  clerk  for  his  fiell     ..... 
Item  the  compters  owne  fiell  ..... 
Item  to  the  off  for  his  fiell        ..... 
Item  payed  to  Auchingray  at  the  buying  the  lands  of  Auchingray 
and  Caldercruiks  qlk  he  hes  allowed  be  the  band  granted 
to  him  in  the  first  end  of  the  pryce  yrof  vv*  600  ll  he  gave 
domie  to  help  to  defray  the  charges  of  the  securities  qlk 
is  also  allowed  be  the  band     inde 
Item  farder  payed  to  Auchingray  on  his  receapt 
Item  farder  payed  to  him  on  his  receapt 
Item  payed  him  farder  on  his  receapt 
Item  to  W™  Telfer  y*  he  was  resting    . 
Item  for  halfe  ane  years  arent  of  the  sd  soume 
Item  to  Hugh  Mure  on  his  accompt  be  precept 
Item  to  Johne  Crafourd  be  precept  fra  Auchingray 
Item  given  for  the  expenss  in  goeing  to  Ed""  and  consulting  the 

securites  and  spent  at  severall  meitings  in  buying  the  land    0316    05    00 
Item  to  Ro'  Allane  for  his  panes  in  wryttg  the  papers  and 

ryts  .... 

Item  to  the  clerks  men 

Item  to  James  Hutchesone  for  helping  to  mak  the  bargane 
Item  to  M''  Ro'  Selkrig  for  his  paines 
Item  for  the  infeftment  of  the  lands    . 
Item  to  Jolme  Crafourd  for  finding  out  some  papers 

wanting  to  mak  \\p  the  securitie  .  .  .  0300    00    00 

Item  to  the  clerk  for  his  paines  in  the  bargane  and  drawing  the 

securites  and  in  goeing  to  Ed^  severall  tymes  and  oyr  places 

anent  the  bargane  .....  0300    00    00 

Item  for  the  expenss  in  confirming  the  house  vnder  the  great 

seall  and  for  the  charges  expenss  and  horse  hyres  of  these 

yt  wer  sent  to  Ed''  to  exped  the  samen  conforme  to  the 

accompt  yrof         ..... 
Item  to  Allane  Glen  for  three  horse  hyrs  to  Paisley 
Item  to  the  off''  be  ordour  of  deacon  cyveiner  and  deacones 
Item  to  Av'^  Barr  for  prenteisfie  w'  Johne  Sheills  sone 
Item  for  mending  the  glase  and  ane  brace  in  James  Duncanes 

laigh  house  and  for  sand  lymb  and  workmanship  .  0002     16    00 

SuiTia  of  the  discharge  is  .  .  .  6821     19     10 

The  qlk  compt  abovewTin  being  read  calculat  and  laid  it  is  found  the 
charge  exceids  the  discharge  in  the  soume  of  eight  hundreth  fyftie  six  pound 
fyve  shilhng  two  pennies  qlk  the  compter  is  ordained  to  pay  in  to  the  subsequent 


.  0029 

00 

00 

.  0004 

04 

00 

'ane  .  0060 

00 

00 

.  0005 

16 

00 

.  0005 

12 

00 

y'  wer 

0533 

06 

08 

0002 

08 

00 

0005 

16 

00 

0033 

06 

08 

1678]       RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  521 

collector  and  therfore  the  sd  deacon  cyveiner  and  remanent  members  of  the 
sd  house  have  exonered  and  heirby  exoners  and  discharges  the  sd  Johne 
Wodrop  compter  of  his  haill  intromissioune  w'  ther  rent  conforme  to  the 
compt  abo\'e\vrIn  he  paying  in  the  sd  rests  be  thir  pnts  for  now  and  ever. 

The  sd  day  be  plurahtie  of  vots  Johne  Wodrop  wes  choysen  and  con- 
tinowit  collector  for  ane  year  to  come  who  did  accept  and  give  his  oath. 

The  same  day  ordanes  the  collector  to  be  charged  the  nixt  year  w*  the 
soume  of  eight  hundreth  fyftie  six  pormd  fyve  shilling  2d.  resting  of  the  last 
compt  and  w'  ane  hundreth  and  fourtie  fyve  pound  for  the  last  years  bucket 
money  and  w'  threttie  four  pound  fyftein  shilling  four  pennes  given  in  of 
burges  money  gotten  the  last  year. 


[The  Minutes  end  here.     What  follow  are  engrossments  at   the  end   of 
the  book.] 


522  RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.        [1616 

[John  Colquhoun's  Mortification.} 

Millimo  sexcentesimo  dec\imo  sexiol. 

The  said  day  the  deacone  convenar  ordanet  thir  p[ntis  after]  writtin  to 
be  insert  and  regrat  in  yis  his  buik  to  remajTie  [ad  ferpe\tHd  re»ta?ientiam 

being  certane  sowmes  of  money  spe till  mortifeit  be  ye 

persounes  \Tider\vrittin  makers  y'^oi  [to  the]  weill  of  ye  pare  sustenit  in  ye 
craftis  hospitall  of  yis  burghe  [and  ci]tie  in  all  tyme  cuing  qrof  the  tenno'' 
fallowes.  Be  it  kend  till  aU  men  be  3"ir  pnt  Ires  me  John  Colquhoun  not  in 
Glasgw  for  ye  lowe  affectioun  and  guidwill  I  [have]  and  beirs  to  y«  craftismen 

of  the  said  burghe  and  thair  hospitall on  ye  west  syde  of  ye 

gait  passand  fra  the  Metropolitane  Kirk  to  ye  wyndheid  and  support  of  ye  puir 
decayit  bretherein  yairintiU  pnt  and  to  cum  and  vther  gud  causs  moving  me 
to  have  gevin  grantit  and  disponit  and  be  yir  pntis  ge\ds  grantis  and  disponis 
to  [James]  Fischer  maltman  pnt  deakin  convenar  of  ye  craftis  of  \'e  said 
burghe  and  his  successors  in  office  haill  craftismen  of  ye  samjTi  pnt  and  to  ciun 
in  name  and  to  ye  weill  of  thair  said  hospitall  and  puir  decayit  brethir  thairintill 
for  ye  tyme  all  and  haill  the  sowme  of  monej*  pticularhe  \Tiderwrittin  addettit 
to  me  be  the  persoimes  following  vpone  ye  bandis  and  securities  eftir  speit 
viz  the  sowme  of  fyftie  pundis  money  prin^'  and  ten  merk  of  expenss  awand 
be  W'"  \A'aUace  burges  of  Paislay  as  prin"  and  WilUam  Bowey  his  cau''  contenit 
in  3"air  obhgatioun  of  ye  dait  ye  last  of  August  1612  zeiris  to  be  pajit  at  Mer- 
times  nixt  the  sowme  of  four  scoir  pundis  money  prin'^  and  tuentie  merkis  of 
expenss  awand  be  Wilha  Wat  mcheand  William  Luiff  skyner  and  Joline  Gairdner 
maltma  his  cau's  contenit  in  y  obhga'une  of  the  dait  ye  xxj  of  September 
1610  to  be  pajit  the  xxj  of  September  nixt  the  sowme  of  foure  hundrethe 
merks  money  prin^'  and  fyftie  pundis  money  of  expenss  awand  be  Jonet  Stewart 
relict  of  vmq'^  Av'^  Stewart  of  Castelmilk  as  prin^'  Mathow  Wallace  of  Gars- 
scaddan  James  Lichtbody  and  Thomas  Clogey  hir  caul's  contenit  in  3^air 
obUga'une  daitit  in  Maij  1616  to  be  payit  at  Witsounday  16..  the  soume 
of  ane  hundrethe  merks  money  prin"  and  xxli  of  expenss  awand  be  WiUiame 
Stirling  of  Law  and  Andro  Stimeling  his  sone  his  cau''  contenit  in  y  obhga'une 
of  the  dait  ye  xiij  day  of  Junij  1614  to  be  payit  at  Witsounday  1617  and  the 
sowme  of  twa  himdrethe  merks  money  prin"  sowme  awand  be  Wilha  Glen 
zoimger  baxter  burges  of  Glasgow  wodsett  be  me  on  his  twa  tenementis  of 
land  w*  y  zaird  and  ptinents  contigue  adjaceii  on  ye  southe  syd  of  Sanct  Tenewis 
gait  boundit  conforme  to  ye  contract  maid  betuix  ws  yairanent  of  ye  dait  ye 
xiij  day  of  Januar  1609  in  ye  qlk  I  am  infeft  \Tidir  reuersioun  of  ye  said  sowme 
and  payment  of  tuentie  merks  zeirlie  tak  dewtie  yairfoir  ay  and  q"  ye  lau" 
redemptioun  as  j'e  contract  beiris  qlk  tak  dewtie  is  payit  to  me  to  Mertimes 
nixt  of  all  zeirs  and  tmes  preceiding  the  saids  prin"  sowmes  extending  in  haill 
to  ye  sowme  of  sax  hundrethe  saxtein  punds  xiij  s.  iiij  d.  money  and  for  thair 


i6i6]        RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW.  523 

securitie  j'airanent  I  haue  maid  and  constitute  as  I  the  said  Johnne  Colquhoun 

be  thir  pntis  maks  and  constitutes  ye  said  deakin  convenar 

to    ye    Weill    of    ye    said [irre]vocabill    cessioners   and 

assignaj'es the    sowmes    of    money    pticularlie    aboue 

contenit  in  the  foirsaidis  obliga~unes  writs 

effect  and  obleisments  contenit  yairintill  w'  power  to  the  said  deacone  convenar 
and  his  successor's  to  ye  weill  of  ye  said  hospitall  to  aske  crave  vplift  and 
receave  fra  the  foimamit  psounes  print's  and  caul's  ye  said  sowmes  cans  register 
ye  samy  at  y  awne  instanceis  as  assignaj'is  foirsaid  precepts  Ires  and  vther 
excalls  j'airvpone  to  rais  caus  put  ye  same  to  dew  execu~une  aganis  yame 
in  all  poynts  and  to  give  discharges  in  y  awin  names  on  the  ressait  yof  as  I 
micht  do  myself  and  hes  transferrit  as  I  the  said  Johne  Colquhoun  be  yir  pntis 
transferris  ye  foirsaids  obhga'unes  and  writtis  sowmes  of  money  haill  effect 
and  substance  thairof  in  ye  psoun  and  favor's  of  the  said  James  Fischer  pnt 
deacone  convenar  and  his  successors  in  office  deakin  convenaris  of  ye  said 
burghe  in  name  and  to  ye  weill  of  the  said  hospitall  and  surrogattis  him  and 
thame  in  my  full  richt  place  and  rowme  yairof  for  now  and  euir  and  to  that 
effect  hes  delyverit  to  liim  ye  saids  wtts  to  be  keipit  and  vsit  to  ye  effect  aboue- 
wttin  as  y  awin  proper  euidents  and  to  y'  effect  consentis  yir  pntis  be  regrat 
in  ye  bulks  of  counsell  commiss''  bulks  of  Glasgow  or  toun  court  bulks  yof 
yin  to  remajTie  for  ewer  and  to  yat  effect  maks  and  constituts 
my  pro''s  coiunctlie  and  seuerallie  promitien  de  ralo  In  witness  qrof  yis  pnt 
wTittin  be  Johne  Craig  not  in  Glasgow  I  have  subscrj-Tiit  as  followes  at 
Glasgow  ye  fourtein  day  of  Junij  j-e  zeir  of  God  jajvjc  and  saxtein  zeirs  befoir 
yir  witness  James  Bell  Colein  Campbell  baillies  Johne  Lawsoune  deane  of 
gild  of  ye  said  burghe  burgess  of  Glasgow  and  ye  said  Johne  Craig  not. 
Sic  sitbscrivil  Johne  Colquhoun  James  Bell  witnes  Colein  Campbell  witnes 
Johne  Lawsoune  witnes  Johne  Craig  witnes. 


524 


RECORDS  OF  THE  TRADES  HOUSE  OF  GLASGOW. 


[List  oj  bonds.] 

Laird  of  Ladieland  and  his  cau^s 

Laird  of  Mynto  and  his  caul's 

Sillertounhill  and  his  cau''s 

VV"  Howie  and  his  caul's   . 

W™  LajTig  and  his  caul's   . 

Eleazer  Hamiltoun  and  his  caul's 

Johne  Farquhar  and  his  caul's 

W™  Stirling  of  Law  and  his  cau's 

Item  reddie  to  be  lent  out  qlk  was  ta  vp  fra  Emok 


iiij<^  mks 
vij<^  ffiks 
v^lx  fi 
iiij''  mks 
ij<=  mks 
Ixxx  1i 
v<=  mks 
j^xxx  merks 
v'=  mks 


Memorandum. 

[Contributions  to  accoimt  of  the  price  of  Lands  of  Gorbals.'] 

From  the  maltmen  .....  4000    merk 

Fra  the  house  4  thowsand  and  ane  hundreth  pundis  besyd  ye  gold  mair  to  ye  hous 
Ite  fra  the  wreichtis  ......   800  merks 

.    500  merks 

.  2000  merks 

.  1000  merks 

.   500  marks 

1000    li 

5000    merkis 

1333    merks    4s.    4d. 

700  merkis 

600  mks 


Fra  the  baxters 
Fra  the  skinneris  . 
Ite  fra  ye  fieschores 
Ite  fra  the  massoims 
Ite  fra  the  cordoneris 
Ite  fra  the  tailzo^'s 
Ite  fra  the  smythes 
Ite  fra  the  weifars 
Ite  fra  the  coupers 


i 


i^4^ 


^ 


I 

Ni. 


« 


'^5^4= 


4xi^^H 


^ 


.<5 


^ 


) 


^  § 
'i 


■=»     O    ^    <i 


<a     ^    Sj     to      ^    ^ 


On 


tJ 


^ 


U 


*4- 


^k 


^ 

i 


^ 


^ 


^^ 


<1 


^ 


tt. 


> 


Appendix. 


I.    EXTRACT  LETTER  OF  GUILDRY  :  qth  Feb.  1605. 

II.    EXTRACT  MINUTE  OF  THE  TOWN  COUNCIL  anent  Ranking, 
Musters,  Wapinschaws,  etc.  :   i6th  Feb.  1605. 

III.  FOUNDATION   OF  THE  TRADES  HOSPITAL,  being  Agreement 

entered  into  by  the  Crafts  of  Glasgow  for  the  support  of 
A  Hospital  for  poor  decayed  craftsmen  burgesses  and  freemen 
of  the  Burgh  :  3RD  August  1605. 

IV.  JAMES  VI. 's  LETTER  anent  the  Election  of  Councillors  :  28th 

Nov.  1606. 

V.    EXTRACT  RATIFICATION  OF  THE  LETTER  OF  GUILDRY  by 
the  Scots  F.'\rliament  :   iith  Sept.  1672. 


Letter    of  Guildry. 


T?  f''f'~l  °"^'"'''  ^^""^^  °^  ^""^'y  ''  "°*  ^°°^^°  t°  e-^ist,  and  the  Burgh 
Records  for  the  penod  from  which  the  extract  must  have  been  taken  are  now 
th"!' t'"^'      I       °«'y  official  extract  known  to  be  extant  is  that  in  possession  of 

s^.els't^h^rtir'  ''^^°  '"^^"^^-  "'^^'^  ^^^'  '^°^^-^^^''  ^-^-^  -p-  -- 

( I )  What  bears  to  be  a  transcript  of  a  notarial  copy  of  the  Letter  of  Guildrv 
IS  engrossed  m  a  minute  book  of  the  Incorporation  of  Bonnetmakers 
which  contams  the  minutes  of  that  craft  from  21st  September 
161  r,  to  19th  September,  1718. 

It  was  written  into  the  minute  book  by  Robert  Brok    notary 

then  clerk  of  the  incorporation,  and  is  a  copy  of  an  extract  from  the 

Burgh  Court  books  made  by  William  Fleming,  servitor  to  Archibald 

Heygait,  town  clerk,  and  certified  by  the  latter's  signature       The 

copy  made  from  the  extract  is  the  first  entry  in  the  mmute  book  of 

the  mcorporation.     The  next  entry  is  a  copy  minute  of  the  Trades 

House  of  date   15th  May,  161 1.      The  entry  next  following,  being 

the  first  minute  of  the  incorporation  in   the  book,  is  dated  21st 

September,  161 1.     In  every  probability,  therefore,  this  copy  of  the 

Letter   of    Guildry   was   witten   by  Brok   from   Heygaifs   extract 

between    15th   May   and   21st   September,    i6ii.      In   any  case    it 

cannot  have  been  copied  into  the  book  later  than  161 7    as  Brok 

ceased  to  be  clerk  of  the  craft  in  that  year.      Whatever  view  of 

the  probable  date  be   taken,   it  is  the  oldest  known   copy  of  the 

Letter  of  Guildr>'.  ^^ 

The  extract  from  which  the  copy  was  taken  must  have  been 
issued  prior  to  3rd  December,  161 2,  by  which  time  Heygait  who 
certified  the  extract  by  his  signature,  had  "  deserted  and  left  his 
place,"  as  is  recorded  in  the  Dean  of  Guild  Court  books  under 
that  date. 

I2)  The  next  oldest  so  far  as  known  is  that  in  possession  of  the  Incor 
poration  of  Weavers.  It  is  in  the  handvvTiting  of  the  middle 
seventeenth  century,  resembling  closely  the  style  of  Wm  Yair  and 
his  assistants.  Wm.  Yair  was  clerk  of  the  Trades  House  from 
1630  to  1672.  He  was  also  clerk  of  the  Incorporations  of  Hammer- 
men, Weavers,  and  Mailmen,  interim  town  clerk  and  town  clerk 
of  Glasgow  during  part  of  that  period.  The  weavers'  copy  is  stated 
in  the  initial  title  to  be  an  extract  of  "  ye  Lettir  of  Gildrie  insert 
and  regrat  in  ye  deikin  convcinars  bulks  verbatim  " 
2  K 


530  LETTER  OF  GUILDRY. 

(3)  There  is  bound  up  in  the  minute  book  of  the  Incorporation  of  Malt- 

men  for  the  period  commencing  22nd  May,  lyig.  what  bears  to  be 
a  copy  of  an  original  extract  from  the  Burgh  and  City  of  Glasgow 
Records.  The  source  from  which  this  copy  was  taken  is  not  other- 
wise indicated. 

(4)  A   copy   of    the  Letter    of    Guildry  appears  in  M'Ure's  History   of 

Glasgow.  M'Ure  does  not  state  how  he  obtained  tire  copy,  but  at 
the  end  of  it,  as  printed  in  his  work,  are  the  words  "  Extractum 
est  de  libro  actorum  curiarum  burgi  de  Glasgow  28vo  Decembris 
anno  1694."  M'Ure  has  undoubtedly  taken  great  liberties  with 
the  original  text,  modernising  many  of  the  words  to  his  own 
time,  and  substituting,  for  instance,  "  Wednesday  "  as  the  fair  day 
instead  of  "  Monday,"  and  shortening  clauses  by  paraphrasing. 
From  the  similarity  between  this  copy  and  the  copy  contained 
in  Crawfurd's  Sketch  of  the  Trades  House,  it  would  appear 
that  Crawfurd  took  his  copy  direct  from  M'Ure.  Crawfurd 
may  not  at  the  time  have  known  of  the  existence  of  the 
original  extract  in  the  possession  of  the  Trades  House.  The 
convener's  box  in  which  all  old  documents  were  then  kept  was  not 
in  the  custody  of  the  clerk  of  the  House.  At  all  events  the  differ- 
ences between  the  original  extract  and  Crawfurd's  copy  are  so 
marked  that  it  is  most  unlikely  he  had  the  original  extract  before  him 
when    appending  his    copy   to    the   Sketch   of  the    Trades   House. 

(5)  Other  copies  are  contained  in  Gibson's  History  of  Glasgow  published 

in  1777  ;  in  the  View  of  the  Merchants  House  of  Glasgow,  published 
in  1866;  and  in  a  Memorial  for  the  Lord  Provost,  Magistrates,  and 
Town  Council  of  Glasgow  relative  to  the  claim  by  tlie  dean  of  guild 
and  his  council  to  appoint  the  clerk  and  assessor  of  the  Dean  of  Guild 
Court  of  Glasgow.  The  last-named  copy,  which  was  prepared  under 
the  guidance  of  the  town  clerk  (in  connection  with  the  case  The 
Dean  of  Guild  ;;.  the  Magistrates  and  Town  Council  of  Glasgow, 
26th  June,  1876),  is  taken  from  M'Ure's  History  and  collated  with 
Gibson's  copy  and  with  the  copy  in  the  View  of  the  Merchants 
House. 

What  follows  is  a  print  verbatim  of  the  of&cial  extract  in  possession  of  the 
Trades  House.  It  has  been  collated  with  the  weavers',  the  bonnetmakers',  and 
the  maltmen's  copies,  and  also  with  M'Ure's  copy. 

The  variations  are  shown  in  the  foot  notes  :  (n)  words  appearing  in  the 
other  copies  and  not  in  the  official  extract  have  been  inserted  within  square 
brackets  ;  (b)  words  in  the  official  extract,  for  which  variations  are  shown  in  the 
foot  notes,  appear  in  itahcs.  All  variations  have  not  been  noted  as  very  many 
are  quite  trivial  and  unworthy  of  record.  (c)  M'U.,  M'Ure;  B.,  bonnetmakers' 
copy;  M.,  maltmen's  copy;  W.,  weavers'  copy.] 


LETTER  OF  GUILDRY.  531 


Extract  (undated)  taken  front  the  Records  of  the  Burgh  of  Glasgotv,  and 
certified   by  John   M'Gilchrist,  Depute  Town  Clerk  (1713-1754). 

Apud  Glasgow  none  die  mensis  Februarij  anno  millesimo 
sexcentesimo  quinto.'  In  the  councilhouse  thereof  being  conveened 
the  Right  Honourable  Sir  George  Elphingston  of  Blythswood'^  provost 
of  the  said  burgh  William  Anderson  Thomas  Muir  and  John  Anderson 
e  bailhes  yrof  Matthew  Trumble^  W  Peter  Low  John  Rowat  Robert 

Adam  Wilham  Wallace  James  Lyone  Umphra  Cuninghame  William 
Fleming*  John  Woddrop  James  Bell  James  Fischer  William  Robertson 
William  Fleming  John  Dickson  John  Scott  deacon  of  lorymers  John 
Muir  James  Braidwood  Wilham  Wilson  thesaurer  Thomas  Pettingrew 

10  rn''  of  work  councillors  of  the  said  burgh  together  with  Ninian  Anderson 

deacon  of  cordeners  Richard  Kirkland  deacon  of  websters  William 
Love  deacon  of  skinners  William  Dunlop  deacon  of  masons  George 
Young  deacon  of  baxters  and  George  PoUok  for  the  deacon  of  the 
coopers  John^  Naismith  deacon  of  the  bonnetmakers  and  Wilham 

1=  Muir  deacon  of  the  fleshers. 

The  whilk  day  in  presence  of  the  provost  baillies  and  great  council  of  the 
burgh  awriten  compeared  personally  W"  Anderson  Thomas  Muir  two  of  the 
baillies  of  said  burgh  Mathew  Trumble  William  Stirling  John  Dickson  James 
IngUs-  Robert  Adam  for  themselves  and  in  name  and  behalf  of  Archibald 

20  Faulls  George  Muir  Thomas  Broun  and  James  Fleming  merchants  commis- 
sioners chosen  and  elected  by  the  haill  body  of  the  merchant  rank  of  this  burgh 
and  their  assisters  on  the  one  part  together  with  John  Anderson  hkeways 
baillie  of  the  said  burgh  M'  Peter  Low  John  Muir  James  Braidwood  James 
Fischer  John  Scott  William  Muir  for  themselves  and  in  name  and  behalf  of 

25  Robert  Rowat  Duncan  Sempill  Gavin  Hamilton  David  Scheirer  and  Thomas 
Fawsyd  as  commissioners  chosen  and  elected  by  the  deacons  of  the  said  burgh 
and  body  of  crafts  within  the  samen  on  the  other  part  for  treating  and  con- 
cluding upon  sundry  privileges  and  hbertys  concerning  the  weell  of  merchants 
and  crafts  within  this  burgh  and  common  weill  yrof  whilks  persons  awriten  as 

30  commissioners  nominat  and  chosen  by  merchants  and  crafts  after  diverse  and 
sundry  meetings  and  long  reasoning  to  the  honour  of  God  and  for  the  weill  of 
both  the  saids  ranks  of  merchants  and  crafts  and  to  the  pubHck  and  common 

1  The  weavers'  copy  and  the  bonnetmakers'  copy  rio  not  give  this  minute  of  the  Town 
Council,  and  the  maltmen's  copy  gives  neither  this  minute  nor  the  commissions  for  merchants  and 
for  crafts. 

2  After  '  Blythswood  '  read  '  knight.'    M'U.  ^  Spelt  '  TurnbuU  '  throughout.    M'U. 
^'Stirling.'     M'U.                "'James.'    M'U.  « After  '  Inglis  '  read  '  James  Bell.'    M'U. 


532  APPENDIX. 

Weill  of  the  said  burgh  and  encrease  of  peace  love  and  quietness'^  amongst 
them  and  their  posterity  by  virtue  of  their  saids  commissions  repive  after 
mature  advisement  having  concluded  that  it  is  most  necessar  that  there  shall 
be  an  dean  of  gild  within  the  said  burgh  and  deacon  conveener  wth  an  visitor 
of  maltmen  and  mealmen  authorised  with  certain  hbertys  and  privileges  for  5 
the  well  and  benefite  of  the  saids  ranks  and  common  weill  as  sd  is  produced  be- 
the  said  provost  baillies  and  council  the  forsds  commissions  granted  imto  them 
together  with  an  letter  in  form  of  an  submission  and  letter  of  deana^gildrie 
deacon  conveener  and  visitor  of  maltmen  and  mealmen  in  due  and  competent 
form  duly  and  laufully  subscrived  with  their  hands  and  by  certain  oursmen  10 
nominat  by  both  the  saids  partys  proceeding  upon  the  commissions  granted 
to  them  and  with  consent  and  advice  of  the  deacons  awriten  most  reverently 
desired  the  saids  provost  bailUes  and  great  council  of  the  said  burgh  to  grant 
and  give  their  full  express  consent  and  assent  to  the  forsaid  letter  haill  heads 
statutes  privileges  and  libertys  contained  yrintill  and  to  subscrive  and  interpone  15 
their  authority  to  the  samen  and  ordain  the  samen  with  the  saids  commissions 
and  letter  in  form  of  submission  to  be  regrat  and  insert  in  the  burrow  court 
books  of  the  said  burgh  that  the  samen  may  take  full  effect  in  all  time  hereafter 
whilk  letter  being  read  and  considered  by  the  said  provost  baillies  and  council 
forsaid  and  being  yrwith  ripely  advised  understanding  the  samen  first  to  redound  20 
to  the  honour  of  God  common  weill  of  this  burgh  and  weill  of  both  the  saids 
ranks  of  merchants  and  craftsmen  and  to  their  mutual  amity  concord  and 
agreement  hereafter  thought  the  forsd  petition  and  desire  most  laufull  and 
reasonable  and  therefor  accepted  received  and  admitted  the  said  letter  and  in 
token  of  their  consents  subscrived  the  samen  and  ordained  the  saids  com- 25 
missions  repive  and  letter  in  form  of  submission  and  letter  of  deanagild^  deacon 
conveener  and  visitor  of  maltmen  and  mealmen  proceeding  and  following 
yrupon  to  be  insert  and  regrat  in  their  burrow  court  books  and  their  authority 
to  be  interponed  3'rto  of  the  whilks  the  tenor  follows  and  first  of  the  com- 
missions repive.  30 

^°rchSts°  Apud  Glasgow    octavo  die   mensis  Novembrts^  anno  domini  millesimo 

sexcentesimo  quarto.^  The  whilk  day  the  haill  body  of  the  merchant  rank 
within  this  burgh  and  city  of  Glasgow  who  were  present  in  the  toun  being 
conveened  to  consult  anent  some  contraversie  fallen  out  betwixt  them  and 
the  craftsmen  of  the  said  burgh  and  their  assisters  for  setleing  qrof  and  good  35 
order  to  be  taken  yranent  both  for  contraversies  by  gone  and  in  time  comeing 
whilks  may  fall  out  for  disquieting  the  members  of  the  haill  body  and  common 
Weill  of  this  burgh  has  all  with  one  assent  after  ripe  advisement  and  matture 
deliberation  thought  most  expedient  to  chuse  and  elect  as  by  thir  presents 

'•Amity.'    M'U.  ^'Before.'    M'U.  ^Qmit  '  deana.'    M'U. 

<'Dean  of  gildric."    M'U.  ''February.    B.  " '  Quinto.'    W.,  B. 

' '  Concerning  both,  for.'    M'U. 


LETTER  OF  GUILDRY.  533 

chuses  and  elects  the  persons  follouing  viz': — W™  Anderson  Thomas  Muir 
baillies  Matthew  Trumble  ^^'iUiam  Stirling  George  Muir  Arch<i  Faulls  John 
Dickson  Thomas  Broun  James  Inglis  Robert  Adam  James  Bell  and  James 
Fleming  merchant  commissioners  for  them  to  consult  reason  intreat  and  agree 
5  and  conclude  upon  all  heads  and  articles  to  be  proponed  and  given  in  before 
them  by  the  saids  craftsmen  and  their  commissioners  and  specially  anent  the 
election  of  an  dean  of  gild  his  council  pouer  and  authority  acts  and  statutes 
as  concerns  the  liberty  and  enlargement  of  both  the  ranks  of  merchants  and 
craftsmen  no  ways  hurtfull  nor  prejudicial  to  the  common  weill  of  this  burgh 

10  with'  liberty  to  the  saids  commissioners  to  nominate  and  elect  one  or  moe 
in  the  place  of  any  one  of  them  who  shall  happen  to  be  absent  and  to  conveene 
at  such  time  and  place  as  they  and  the  saids  crafts  commissioners  or  these 
to  be  elected  to  be  of  the  number  shall  conclude  anent  the  premisses  and  what 
the  saids  commissioners  concludes  the  body  of  the  said  merchant  rank  present 

15  obhges  them  to  abyd  yrat  in  all  time  comeing  butt  contradiction  in  witness  qrof 
the  saids  merchants  required  me  notar  underwriten  to  subscrive  thir  presents 
for  them  as  their  common  clerk  for  the  time  in  name  of  them  all  day  year  and 
month  forsaid.  Sic  subtr.  Joannes  Craig  notarious  publicus  clericus  praedict 
testaii  his  meis  signo  et  subscriptione  manuahbus. 

20         Apud  Glasgow  the  eight  day  of  November  the  year  of  God  jaj  six  hundred  Commission 
four  years.     The  whilk  day  the  haill  deacons  of  craft  of  Glasgow  for  them-    '^'■'^""'■ 
selves  and  in  name  and  behalf  of  the  remanent  of  their  bretheren  and  community 
conveened  to  consult  anent  some  contraversies  fallen  out  betwixt  them  and 
the  merchant  rank  of  the  said  burgh  and  for  setleing  the  same  and  good  order 

25  to  be  taken  yrwith  as  also  of  all  other  things  whilk  heretofore  has  fallen  out 
or  an}'  ways  hereafter  may  ensue  or  fall  out  for  the  disquieting  of  the  members 
of  ane  body  in  ane  common  weill  has  all  with  ane  consent  with  matture 
deliberation  thought  most  meet  and  expedient  to  choice  and  elect  as  by  thir 
presents  choices  and  elects  for  themselves  and  in  name  and    behalf  of  the 

30  community  thir  persons  follouing  viz' : — John  Anderson  bailhe  Robert  Ro\:at 
M''  Peter  Low  Duncan  Sempill  John  Muire  skipper  James  Braidwood  Gavin 
Hamilton  James  Fischer  John  Scott  Thomas  Fausyd  David  Schearer  William 
Muir  commissioners  for  them  to  consult  reason  and  conclude  upon  all  articles 
to  be  proponed  and  to  be  given  in  before  them  by  the  merchant  tread  and 

35  specially  concerning  the  election  of  an  dean  of  gild  and  of  his  council  and  pouer 
and  likeways  anent  such  acts  and  statutes  as  concerns  the  hberty  and  inlargeing 
of  the  crafts  and  their  assisters  always  no  ways  prejudgeing  the  common 
Weill  with  liberty  to  their  said  commissioners  to  nominate  and  elect  one  or 
moe  in  the  place  of  any  of  them  that  shall  happen  to  be  absent  and  to  conveen 

40  at  such  time  and  place  as  they  and  the  merchant  rank  shall  think  good  and 
whatever  the  saids  commissioners  or  these  to  be  elected  to  fill  their  number 

'  After  '  with '  read  '  power  and.'     W,,  B. 


534  APPENDIX. 

shall  conclude  anent  the  premisses  the  deacons  for  themselves  and  oyrs  forsaid 
shall  stand  and  abyde  yrat  inviolably  in  all  times  to  come.  In  witness  qrof 
the  deacons  and  community  forsaid  has  required  me  notar  under  writen  to 
subscrive  thir  presents  for  them  at  day  month  and  year  forsaid.  Ita  est  magr 
Joannes  AUanson  notarius  publicus  clericus  predict  testante  manu.  Follows  5 
the  submission. 

Submission  At  Glasgow*  the  tenth  day  of  November  the  year  of  God  jajvjc  and  four 

and 'crafts!'"  years  we  William  Anderson  Thomas  Muir  baillies  Matthew  Trumble  William 
StirUng  James  Fleming  George  Muir  Jolm  Dickson  James  Inghs  Archibald 
Faulls  Thomas  Broun  Robert  Adam  for  ourselves  and  in  name  and  behalf  as  lo 
commissioners  taking  the  burden  for  the  haill  merchants  indwellers  in  the 
said  burgh  on  the  ane  part  John  Anderson  baiUie  Robert  Rowat  M''  Peter  Low 
Duncan  Sempill  M'  Robert  Hamilton  John  Muir  skipper  James  Braidwood 
Gavin  Hamilton  James  Fischer  John  Scott  Thomas  Fawsyde  David  Schearer 
WiUiam  Muir  for  themselves  and  in  name  and  behalf  and  as  commissioners  15 
for  the  haill  crafts  their  assisters  and  community  indwellers  in  the  said  burgh 
of  Glasgow  on  the  other  part  they  both  partys  as  having  commission  of  the 
haiU  merchants  and  crafts  and  their  assisters  to  conveen  reason  and  consult 
intreat  and  conclude  anent  the  removeing  of  all  questions  different^  con- 
traversies  whilk  are  or  has  been  betwixt  the  saids  merchants  and  crafts  [and]  20 
their  assisters  concerning  whatsomever  cause  or  occasion  qrupon  debate  or 
question  may  arise  in  any  time  betwixt  them  and  first  concerning  the  dean  of 
gild  form  and  manner  of  his  election  pouer  and  authority  his  council  and 
bretheren  and  their  election  his  privileges  and  libertys  with  all  oyr  circum- 
stances as  effeirs  and  for  the  better  instruction  to  the  communers  we  have  25 
ordained  one  or  tuo  to  travell  to  Edinr  to  bring  the  just  copie  of  the  letters  of 
gildrie  with  acts  [and]  hbertys  pertaining  yrto  either  vmder  the  common  clerk 
of  the  burgh  of  Edinburgh  or  two  notars  subscriptions  and  sikhke  to  consult 
and  conclude  upon  such  heads  articles  and  statutes  as  is  to  be  proponed  by 
the  merchant  trade  whilk  any  ways  may  tend  to  the  weill  Uberty  and  privilege  30 
and  inlargeing  of  the  merchant  rank  in  any  ways  providing  alwise  these  acts 
statutes  and  Ubertys  be  without  prejudice  in  any  point  or  part  to  the  common 
Weill  or  weill-  of  the  crafts  and  their  assisters.  In  like  manner  they  shall  intreat 
and  conclude  of  the  deacon  conveener  whoever  shall  be  chosen  most  discreet  wise 
and  worthie  man  amongst  all  the  crafts  for  their  weill  and  farder  shall  confirm  35 
authorize  and  inlarge  the  hbertys  of  the  crafts  and  their  assisters  in  all  heads 
and  points  whilk  shall  be  proponed  by  the  said  crafts  commissioners  pro\iding 
alwise  they  be  neither  prejudicial  to  the  merchant  trade  their  assisters  and 
community  nor  common  weill  of  this  burgh  and  to  the  effect  that  grudges'^ 
shall  take  an  end  both  the  partys  has  appionted  to  meet  the  twenty  day  of40 

*  The  maltmen's  copy  begins  here. 
1  •  Differences  and.'     .M'U.  'Omitted.     MU.  "Things.     MU.,  W.,  B. 


LETTER  OF  GUILDRY.  535 

this  instant  at  the  whilk  day  and  at  such  other  times  as  shall  be  thought  most 
convenient  for  meeting  if  it  shall  happen  the  said  partys  to  conclude  upon 
heads  statutes  and  articles  for  the  well  of  both  merchants  and  crafts  their 
assisters  community  and  successors  in  aU  time  comeing  and  yet  not  agreeing 
5  in  the  haill  heads  proponed  by  either  of  the  partys  or  both  in  that  case  we  have 
with  both  our  consents  chosen  Mr  David  Weims  and  Mr  John  Bell  ministers 
together  with  tuo  merchants  and  tuo  craftsmen  of  Edinburgh  or  other  burghs^ 
to  be  judges  and  oursmen  providing  they  be  chosen  with  the  advice  of  both 
the  partys  such  as  shall  be  found  most  meet  by  both  our  consents  the  whilk 

10  judges  shall  receive  both  our  claims  and  greiffs-  with  answers  yrto  and  reasons 
made  yrto  whilks  being  heard  and  considered  by  them  shall  conclude  according 
to  their  conscience^  upon  all  heads  and  articles  questionable  and  shall  be  set 
doun  by  them  in  due  form  for  both  our  weills  not  prejudgeing  the  common 
well  of  this  burgh  in  the  whilk  doing  we  obhge  us  both  partys  to  stand  byde 

15  imderlye  and  fulfill  the  decreet  and  dehverance  of  the  saids  judges  or  oursmen 
without  any  appellation  reclamation  or  contradiction  whatsomever  in  token 
qrof  we  the  saids  persons  commissioners  have  subscrived  thir  presents  with 
oiu"  hands  as  follows.  Sic  subf.  W"  Andersoun  baillie  Thomas  Mure  baillie* 
Mathew  Trumble  James  Bell  W"  Stirhng  James  Fleming  Ar'^  Faulis  Thomas 

20  Broune  James  Ingilis  we  Robt  Adam  and  John  Dickson  with  our  hands  at 
the  pen  led  by  the  notar  under  writen  because  we  could  not  write  our  self.  Ita 
est  Archibaldus  Heygait  de  mandato  dictarum  personarum  scribere  nesciefi 
signavit.  Jo°  Andersoune  Ro'  Rowat  M'  Peter  Low  Duncan  Sempill  Jo"  Mure 
James   Braidwood    Gawan    Hamiltoune   David  Schearer  Thomas  Fawsyd  M' 

25  Ko'  Hamiltoune''.  Ita  est  mgr  Joannes  AUanesoune  notarius  pubhcus  de 
mandat  Joannis  Scott  et  W'illiclmi  Mure  scribere  nesciefi  calamumque  tangen 
testante  manu. 


Folloies  the  letter  of  gildrie  deacon  conveener  and  visitor  of 
maltmen  and  mealmen. 

At  the  burgh  and  city  of  Glasgow  the  sixth  day  of  Februar  the  year  of  Lre  of  deau 
God  jajvjc  and  five  years  forsameikle  as  the  haill  inhabitants  within  this  burgh  °  ^'   ""' 

30  and  city  of  Glasgow  burgeses  and  freemen  yrof  as  well  merchants  as  craftsmen 
having  duly  considered  and  deeply  weighed  the  great  hurt  interest  damage 
loss  and  skaith  whilks  their  haiU  common  weill  their  money  years  bygone  has 
sustained  by  strangers  and  unfreemen  using  and  usurping  the  privileges  and 
ancient  libertys  of  this  burgh  alse  freely  as  the  freemen  and  burgessis  indwellers 

35  within  the  samen  and  partly  by  some  mutual  contraversies  and  civil  discords 
arising  amongst  the  said  freemen  and  burgesses  anent  their  privileges  places 

'Omitted.     M'U.     '  Or  other  burgesses.'     B.  =•  Briefs.'     M'U.  s.Co„sents.'     M'U. 

*Oniilted.     M'U.  'Omitted.     M'U.,  W.,   B. 


536  APPENDIX. 

ranks  and  prerogatives  by  the  whilks  occasions  not  only  the  trade  traffick 
and  handleing  has  been  usurped  by  strangers  and  unfreemen  as  said  is  to  the 
great  depauperating  of  the  haill  inhabitants  within  this  toun  but  also  all  policie 
and  care  of  the  hbertys  of  this  burgh  has  been  overseen  and  neglected  to  the 
great  shame  and  derogation  of  the  honour  of  this  burgh  being  ane  of  the  most  5 
renounced^  citys  within  this  realme  and  having  found  the  only  cause  yrof  to 
be  for  the  want  of  an  solid  and  setled  order  amongst  themselves  therefor  and 
for  remead  yrof  in  time  comeing  and  for  conforming  of  themselves  the  said 
burgh  and  city  to  other  weill  reformed  burghs  of  this  realme  and  for  the  common 
Weill  and  particular  estate-  of  the  haiU  inhabitants  thereof  in  their  owti  ranks  10 
and  their  posteritys  in  all  time  comeing  and  specially  to  the  advancement  of 
Gods  glory  and  their  better  habiUty  to  serve  our  sovereign  lord  the  kings 
majesty  and  for  setleing  of  peace  concord  amity  amongst  themselves  as  faithfull 
Christians  and  loving  citizens  the  saids  haill  merchants  and  craftsmen^  and 
their  assisters  of  both  the  ranks  and  haill  body  of  this  toun  after  many  meetings  15 
and  conventions  long  disputation  and  reasoning  concerning  their  common 
weill  quietness  and  standing  yrof  having  nominate  and  chosen  now  W" 
Anderson  Thomas  Mure  bailhes  Mathew  Trumble  Robert  Adam  James  Bell 
John  Dickson  Wilham  Stirling  Archibald  FauUs  James  Inglis  James  Fleming 
George  Muir  and  Thomas  Broun  for  the  haill  merchant  rank  and  their  assisters  20 
John  Anderson  baillie  Robt  Rov\at  M'  Peter  Low  Duncan  Sempill  James 
Braidwood  John  Scott  deacon  John  Muir  skipper  M''  Robert  Hamiltoun  Gavin 
Hamiltoun  Thomas  Fawsyd*  \\'illiam  Muir  flesher  and  James  Fischer  maltman 
for  the  haill  craftsmen  and  their  assisters  and  the  right  hon"  Sir  George 
Elphingston  of  Blythswood  knight  provost  M''  David  Weims  parson  of  Glasgow  25 
M''  John  Bell  and  M''  Robert  Scott  ministers  yrof  as  oversmen  and  odsmen 
commonly  chosen  betwixt  the  saids  merchants  and  crafts  in  case  of  variance 
and  the  saids  persons  having  accepted  the  said  matter  in  and  upon  them  being 
diverse  times  conveened  to  treat  and  reason  upon  the  saids  matters  concerning 
the  commonweill  of  this  burgh  after  long  reasoning  had  j-rintill  for  the  better  30 
advancement  of  the  said  common  [weill]  and  setleing  of  all  contraversies  that 
may  fall  furth  yrafter  betwixt  any  of  the  saids  ranks  of  merchants  and  crafts- 
men and  their  assisters  and  successors  and  for  the  better  enlargeing  of  both 
their  libertys  freedomes  and  privileges  qrthrough  they  may  live  in  time  comeing 
in  the  fear  of  God  obedient^  to  his  majesty  and  in  good  love  peaceable  amity  35 
and  concord  amongst  themselves  so  that  both  the  estates  may  flourish  yrafter 
and  after  great  pains  long  traveUings  and  mature  dehberation  heard  seen  and 
considered  and  ripely  advised  by  both  the  estates  of  the  saids  merchants  and 
craftsmen  and  their  assisters  has  concluded  that  there  shall  be  in  all  time 
coming  an  dean  of  gild  an  deacon  conveener  and  an  visitor  of  the  maltmen40 
whose  election  statutes  and  privileges  follows. 

>•  Renowned.'    M'U.,  W.,  M.,  B.  =' Profit.'    M'U.,  W.,  M.  'Omitted.     M'U. 

^Omitted.    M'U.  'Obedience'    M'U.,  W.,  M.,   B. 


LETTER  OF  GUILDRY.  537 

Item  that  the  dean  of  gild  shall  be  always    an    merchant  and    that  an  Dean  of  gild 
merchant  sailer  or  merchant  venturer'-  and  of  the  rank  of  merchant  and  shall  be\n^  "^^^^ 
be  chosen  yearly  by  provost  bailUes  and  council  and  deacons  of  this  burgh  merchant. 
in  time  comeing  that  same  day  xv  days  that  the  baillies  of  the  said  burgh 
5  is  chosen  and  there  shall  be  ahke  many  of  merchants  and  craftsmen  at  his 
election. 

Item  the  dean  of  gild  bearing  office  the  year  preceding  shall  with  the  Lytcs  for  the 
advice  of  twenty  four  persons  of  the  merchant  rank  whom  he  shall  chuse  '^'^"°  ^'  ' 
nominate  two  of  the  merchant  rank  to  be  on  lyte  with  himself  whose  names 
10  shall  be  presented  in  write  before  provost  baillies  council  and  deacons  as  is 
above  specitt  of  the  whilk  three  they  shall  chuse  ane  to  bear  office  the  year 
following  and  so  to  be  lyted  and  elected  in  all  time  comeing  and  sworn  in 
presence  of  provost  baiUies  council  and  deacons  for  discharging  of  his  faithfuU 
duty  as  becomes  the  dean  of  gild  shall  not  bear  office  above  two  years  together. 

15         Item  the  dean  of  gilds  council  shall  be  composed  yearly  of  eight  persons  Council  of  the 
viz'  four  merchants  qrof  the  dean  of  gild  bearing  office  the  year  preceeding  ^'^'^'^  °*  ^'''^' 
shall  be  ane  and  four  craftsmen  all  gild  brether  who  shall  be  men  of  good  fame 
knoulege  experience  care  and  zeal  to  the  common  weill   the   most  worthiest 
men  of  both  the  ranks  the  dean  of  gild  his  council  of  the  merchant  rank  shall  be 

20  chosen  yearly  bj'  the  dean  of  gild  and  tuenty  four  persons  of  the  merchant 
rank  whom  he  shall  chuse  to  that  effect  and  his  council  of  the  craftsmen  rank 
shall  be  chosen  by  the  deacon  conveener  and  the  remanent  of  the  deacons  of 
crafts  and  their  assisters  and  their  haill  council  to  be  sworn  yearly  at  their 
election  in  presence  of  the  dean  of  gild  and  shall  be  yearly  elected  and  sworn 

25  the  next  day  after  the  dean  of  gild  bees  chosen. 

Item  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  shall  conveen  every  Thursday  at  ten  The 
hours  before  noon  and  offer  as  the  necessity  of  the  common  affairs  comitted  thedean"of°* 
to  thair  charge  shall  require  being  warned  yrto  by  the  dean  of  gild  or  his  officer  s'''^ '«  be. 
and  the  persons  absent  the  said  day  oulklie-  butt  farder  warning  at  the  said 

30  hour  and  at  other  times  being  laufully  warned  not  being  sick  or  three  miles 
off  the  toun  shall  pay  an  unlaw  of  six  shillings  eight  pennys  for  the  first  the 
second  thirteen  shiHings  four  pennys  and  for  the  third  tuenty  shilhngs  and  if 
the  dean  of  gild  himself  be  absent  at  any  of  these  times  he  not  being  sick  or 
three  miles  off  the  toun  he  shall  pay  tuice  sameikle  of  unlaw  at  ilk  time  as  his 

35  council  pays  for  their  absence. 

Item  in  absence  of  the  dean  of  gild  whilk  shall  not  be  alloued  except  he  Absence  of  the 
be  sick  or  three  miles  off  the  toun  or  for  some  necessar  and  urgent  cause  to  '^'^^"  °*  ^'''^' 
be  knoun  and  tryed  by  his  council  and  obtaining  their  leaves  in  that  case  he 
shall  elect  by  their  advice  the  old  dean  of  gild  or  any  other  of  his  council  of  the 

''V'intiner.'     M.  only.  -'Only.'     M. 


538 


APPENDIX. 


merchant  rank  to  supply  his  place  as  his  substitute  during  his  absence  who  shall 
be  sworn  and  if  any  ane  or  moe  of  the  dean  of  gilds  council  of  the  merchant 
rank  bees  absent  it  shall  be  leisom  to  the  dean  of  gild  to  bring  iw'  any  gild 
brother  of  his  oun  rank  and-  ane  or  mae  to  supply  that  place  of  the  merchant 
rank  being  absent  during  the  absence  of  the  other  and  if  any  of  the  crafts  5 
rank  ane  or  mae  of  the  dean  of  gilds  council  be  absent  the  eldest  gild  brother 
of  his  council  of  the  crafts  rank  shall  cliuse  another  ane  or  mae  of  the  crafts 
rank^  to  supply  the  place  of  the  other  during  his  absence  who  shall  be  an  gild 
brother  and  sworn. 


What  the 
dean  shall  be. 


Decreets  of 
the  dean  to  be. 


Procatours. 


Pouer  of 
the  deans 
judgement. 


Dean  and  his 
council  to  be 
lyners. 


Item  the  dean  of  gild  shall  be  ever  an  ordinar  councillour  of  the  great  lo 
council  of  the  toun  and  he  shall  have  an  principal  key  of  the  touns  charter  chest 
in  keeping. 

Item  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  or  the  most  part  yrof  shall  have  pouer 
to  decern  in  all  matters  committed  to  his  charge  and  office  and  y'  within  three 
days  if  need  requires  and  shall  elect  an  clerk  yearly  for  the  better  discharge  of  15 
their  office  who  shall  be  sworn  before  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council. 

Item  no  pror  nor  man  of  law  shall  be  admitted  to  speak  or  procure  for  any 
person  before  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  but  the  partys  allennerly. 

Item  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  shall  have  pouer  to  judge  and  decreet 
in  all  actions  betwixt  merchant  and  merchant  and  merc¥  and  mariner^  and  20 
other  gUd  brother^  in  all  matters  of  merchandizes  or  other  such  causes  and  the 
party  refusing  to  submitt  his  cause  to  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  shall 
pay  an  unlaw  of  five  pounds  money  and  the  cause  being  submitted  the  party 
found  in  the  WTong  to  pay  an  unlaw  of  tuenty  shilhngs  whilk  tuo  several  unlaws 
shall  be  paid  to  the  dean  of  gild  and  appUed  to  such  uses  as  he  and  his  council  25 
thinks  good. 

Item  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  with  the  master  of  work  shall  bear 
the  burden  in  decerning  all  questions  of  neighbourhead  and  lyneing  within 
this  burgh  and  no  neighbours  work  to  be  stayed  but  by  him  who  shall  cause 
the  complainer  consign  in  his  hands  an  pledge  worth  tuenty  shillings  of  unlaw''  30 
and  the  damage  of  the  party  who  then  shall  stay  the  work  to  ane  day  to  be 
assigned  by  him  to  the  complainer  to  give  in  his  complaint  warning  the  party 
whilk  day  shaU  be  within  tuenty  four  hours  after  the  consignation  at  the 
whilk  day  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  or  the  most  part  of  them  shall  con- 
veen  upon  the  ground  and  the  complainer  not  compearing  and  found  in  the  35 
wrong  shall  pay  an  unlaw  of  tuenty  shilhngs  with  the  partys  damage  for 
hindering  the  work  to  be  instantly  taxed  and  modified  by  the  dean  of  gild 


•Or.'    W. 
*  Omitted. 


'Omitted. 


M'U. 


M'U.,  W. 
Brothers." 


M.,  B. 

M'U. 


^Omitted. 
"> '  In  v.-ilue  ' 


W.,  M. 

M'U. 


un  freemen, 
usurping 


LETTER  OF  GUILDRY.  539 

and  his  council  and  paid  furth  of  the  said  pledge  and  the  party  finding  him 
grieved  by  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council'^  upon  consignation  of  the  double 
unlaw  to  be  heard  before  the  great  council  of  the  toun  and  if  he  have  com- 
plained wTongously  to  pay  the  said  double  unlaw. 

5         Item^  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  shall  be  overseers  of  all  commone  The  dean 
works  of  the  toun  above  the  master  of  work  and  shall  yearly  be  present  at  the  common 
making  of  his  compts  with  the  council  of  the  toun  and  deacon  conveener  and  works. 
that  it  shall  not  be  leisome  to  the  touns  tresaurer  at  any  time  yrafter  to  deburse 
any  greater  sum  exceeding  ten  pounds  money  without  an  special  warrant  sub- 
10  scrived  by  the  bailhe  dean  of  gild  and  deacon  conveener. 

Item  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  shall  have  pouer  to  discharge  punish  To  punish 
and  unlaw  all  persons  unfreemen  useing  the  liberty  of  an  freeman  within  the 
liberty  of  this  burgh  as  they  shall  think  good  and  ay  and  while  the  said  unfree-  liberty. 
men  be  put  off  the  toun  and  restrained  or  else  be  made  free  with  the  toun  and 
15  the  crafts  and  siklike  to  pursue  before  the  judges  competent  all  persons  dwelUng 
without^  this  burgh  and  using*  the  liberty  yrof  obtain  decreets  agt  them  and 
cause  the  samen  be  put  to  speedy  execution. 

Item  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  to  oversee  and  reform^  the  metts  To  reform  the 
and  measures  great  and  small  of  pynt  and  quart  peck  and  firlot^  of  all  sorts  ™^^^'^^^' 
20  with"  the  ellwand  and  weights  of  pound  and  stone  of  all  sorts  and  to  punish 
and  unlaw  the  transgressors  as  they  shall  think  expedient. 

Item  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  shall  have  pouer  to  raise  a  taxation  Taxations 
upon  the  gildbrether  for  the  welfare  and  maintainance  of  the  estate  and  help 
of  their  decayed  gildbrether  their  wifes  children  and  servants  and  who  refuses 
25  to  pay  the  said  taxation  shall  be  unlaued  in  the  sum  of  forty  shillings  so  oft 
as  they  failzie  providing  the  samen  exceed  not  the  sum  [of]  ane  hundered 
pounds  money  at  once  upon  the  haill  gild  brether  whilk  taxation  being  uplifted 
the  samen  shall  be  distribute  by  the  dean  of  gild  [and]  his  council  and  deacon 
conveener  as  they  shall  think  expedient. 

30         Item  every  burges  presently  dwelling  and  having  his  residence  within  this  Burgeses 
toun  and  who  has  born  and  presently  bears  burden  within  the  samen  shall  burden. 
pass    gild    brother    for    payment    of     the    sum    of    thirteen    shilhngs    four 
pennys  at  his  entry  to  the  dean  of  gild  with  three  shillings  four  pennys  to  the 
hospital  of  his  calling  and  shall  use  all  kind  of  handleing  and  trade  that  is  laufull 

35  during  all  the  days  of  their  hfetime  at  their  pleasure  secluding  frae  this  benefite 
all  kind  of  infamous  and  debauched  men  of  evil  Ufe  and  conversation  whilk 
are  not  worthy  of  such  a  benefite  who  nevertheless  during  their  lifetimes  shall 

'Omitted.     M.  =  This  section  omitted.     M'U.  2' Within."     M'U. 

*•  Usurping.'     M'U.,  W.,  M.,  B.  •''Omitted.     M.  «' Fourth  p.irt.'     M. 

"'Within.'     M'U. 


540 


APPENDIX. 


be  overseen  yrintill  and  their  bairns  after  their  decease  if  they  be  found  worthy 
and  habile  by  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  shall  have  the  hke  benefite  that 
others  gild  brethers  bairns  has  and  all  burgeses  and  freemen  above  writen  who 
are  not  off  the  countrey  shall  be  bound  to  enter  gild  brothers  betwixt  and  the 
first  day  of  May  next  to  come  otherways  to  be  repute  and  holden  as  strangers  5 
and  who  are  absent  off  the  countrey  shall  enter  gild  brether  within  fifteen  days 
after  their  homecomeing  secluding  also  fra  this  benefite  of  an  gild  brother  all 
burgeses  who  has  not  their  residence  within  this  burgh  and  all  burgeses  within 
the  samen  who  has  not  born  nor  bears  burden  with  the  freemen  of  this  burgh 
(noblemen  excepted).  10 


Gild  brethers 
sous. 


Item  every  gild  brothers  son  or  sons  that  desires  to  be  gild  brother  shall 
pay  at  his  entry  twenty  shillings  for  his  gildry  with  five  shiUings  to  the  hos- 
pital of  his  oun  calhng  whenever  he  desires  to  pass  either  before  or  after  his 
fathers  decease  with  this  restriction  that  if  he  be  an  merchant  and  of  that 
calling  he  shall  be  worth  in  lands  heretage  and  moveable  gear  five  hunderedi5 
merks  money  and  their  assisters  als  meikle  and  if  he  be  ane  craftsman  and  of 
their  assisters  he  shall  be  worth  in  lands  heretages  and  moveable  gear  two 
hundered  and  fifty  merks  money  before  he  be  admitted  and  received  gild 
brother  and  siklike  gif  they  be  of  honest  life  and  conversation  and  worthy 
of  the  benefite  of  an  gild  brother''  \vho  shall  be  tryed  by  the  dean  of  gild  and  20 
his  council  and  as  concerning  the  infamous  and  debauched  persons  not  worthy 
of  the  benefite  of  an  gild  brother  for  the  better  knoulege  and  tryal  of  them  the 
dean  of  gild  by  advice  of  certain  of  the  merchant  rank  so  many  of  such  as  he 
shall  chuse  to  that  effect  shall  enroll  all  the  names  of  these  of  the  merchant 
rank  and  their  assisters  who  are  worth-  and  every  deacon  to  trj^  their  own  25 
craft  and  that  by  the  advice  of  the  deacon  conveener  who  shall  tiy  their 
assisters  who  are  unworthy  and  thir  persons  shall  be  booked  in  the  dean  of 
gilds  books  as  infamous  and  unworthj'. 


Gild  brethers 

daughters. 


Item  every  gild  brothers  daughter  that  maries  an  freeman  burges  of  this 
burgh  shall  pay  at  his  entry  for  his  gildry  twenty  shilUngs  with  five  shilUngs3o 
to  the  hospital  of  his  calhng  and  he  shall  be  worth  someikle  of  lands  heretage 
and  moveable  gear  as  is  above  writen  merchant  or  craftsman  and  tryed  worthy 
by  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  and  this  privilege  to  extend  to  an  gild 
brothers  daughter  how  money  soever  he  have  providing  the  daughter  have 
no  farder  benefite  of  the  gildry-  but  to  her  first  husband  allennerly  and  this  35 
benefite  shall  allennerly  appertain  and  extend  to  sons  and  daughters  of  gild 
brether  gotten  in  laufull  marriage. 


Bairns  laufuUv  Item  because  there  is  sundry  laufull  bairns  whose  fathers  hcis  been  freemen 

and  burgeses  within  this  burgh  and  are  deceased  within  these  ten  years  who 

'Omitted.     M'U.  =  ■  Umvorthy.'     M'U.,  W.,  M.,  B. 


LETTER  OF  GUILDRY.  54i 

of  equity  conscience  and  good  reason  would  not  be  secluded  from  this  benefite 
it  is  yrfor  concluded  that  such  bairns  shall  either  by  themselves  or  by  their 
friends  (in  case  they  be  minors)  compear  before  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council 
and  book  themselves  as  laufuU  bairns  to  their  fathers  who  yrafter  when  occasion 
5  shall  serve  shall  have  the  benefite  of  an  gild  brother  paying  only  tuenty  shillings 
and  five  shiUings  to  the  hospitall  of  their  oun  caUing  always  being  tryed  habile 
meet  and  worthy  such  an  benefite  and  to  be  worth  the  sum  above  writen 
merchant  or  craftsman  by  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  providing  that  the 
saids  bairns  or  their  friends  compear  before  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council 
10  to  be  booked  in  his  book  betwixt  and  the  first  day  of  May  next  to  come  other- 
ways  to  have  no  benefite  7Hore  than  an  unfreeman.'' 

Item  all  burgeses  wifes  within  this  burgh  for  the  present  shall  enjoy  such  Burgcses 
privileges  and  Ubertys  during  the  time  of  their  widowhead  as  if  their  husbands  ^^'  ^^ 
were  on  hfe  in  the  benefite  of  gildry  paying  to  the  dean  of  gild  thirteen  shillings 
15  four  pennys  with  three  shilUngs  four  pennys  to  the  hospital  of  their  husbands 
calling  the  saids  widows  being  always  tryed  by  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council 
to  be  of  good  life  and  honest  conversation  and  the  widows  to  come  shall  have 
the  same  liberty  if  their  husbands  have  been  gild  brether  otherways  not  to 
enjoy  that-  benefite. 

20         Item  anent  the  prentices  of  gild  brether  burgeses  of  merchants  and  crafts  Prentices  of 
and  their  assisters  first  for  the  better  tryal  and  proof  of  their  good  conditions 
next  they  ought  to  be^  far  inferior  to  their  masters  bairns  as  touching  their 
right  through  their  master  and  thirdly  to  move  them  to  take  in  marriage 
their  masters  daughters  before  any  others  whilk  will  be  an  great  comfort  and 

25  support  to  freemen  that  yrfor  no  prentice  be  received  burges  by  right  of  his 
prenticeship  without  he  have  served  an  free  man  after  the  ish  of  his  prentice- 
ship  for  the  space  of  two  years  for  meat  and  fee  and  then  to  be  received  burges 
as  an  prentice  paying  then  for  his  biirgesship*  to  the  toun  ten  merks  and  not 
then  to  be  received  gild  brother  by  that  right  without  he  be  an  burges  for  four 

30  years  sua  to  abyd  thirteen  years  before  he  be  an  gild  brother  by  right  of  his 
prenticeship  paying  then  only  to  the  dean  of  gild  ten  merks  money  for  his 
gildry  who  shall  be  bound  before  his  receiving  gild  brother  to  bring  and  produce 
before  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  an  sufficient  testimonial  subscrived  by 
the  notar  who  is  clerk  to  witt  if  he  be  an  merchant  prentice  or  any  of  their 

35  assisters  he  shall  have  his  testimonial  subscrived  by  the  dean  of  gilds  clerk 
and  if  he  be  an  prentice  to  an  craftsman  or  any  of  their  assisters  he  shall  bring 
an  sufficient  testimonial  of  the  deacon  conveeners  clerk  of  his  prenticeship 
and  this  noways  to  be  extended  agt  burges  sons  farder  nor  old  use  and  wont 
but  if  the  prentice  marry  his  masters  daughter  or  the  daughter  of  an  freeman 

'Omitted.    M'U.  -  After  '  that '  read  '  profit  and.'    W.  =  After  '  be  '  read  '  so.'    M'U. 

* '  Prenticeship.'    M.,  B.    Left  blank.    W, 


gild  brether. 


542  APPENDIX. 

burges  and  gild  and  bees  found  by  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  worth  the 
sum  above  writen  merchant  or  craftsman  and  of  honest  conversation  and 
worthy  of  such  an  benefite  being  so  tryed  in  that  case  to  be  received  gild 
brother  at  any  time  by  right  of  his  wife  paying  only  tuent}'  shilUngs  with  five 
shillings  to  the  hospital  of  his  calling  otherways  to  pay  the  extremity.  5 

Who  are  not  Item    that  every  outtentoun  man    merchant  or  craftsman  not  as  j^et 

"  '    burges  and  freeman  within  this  burgh  who  enters  hereafter  first  shall  be  tryed 

by  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  being  found  worthy  of  the  sum  as  is  par- 
ticularly above  writen  according  to  his  calling  and  of  honest  and  good  conver- 
sation as  said  is  shall  pay  for  his  gildry  after  that  he  is  burges  before  that  he  10 
be  admitted  gild  brother  thirty  pounds  money  and  to  the  hospitall  of  his  calling 
thirty^  shillings  and  four  pennys  except  he  marie  an  gild  brothers  daughter 
who  then  shall  pay  for  his  gildry  twenty  shillings  and  forty  shilUngs  to  the 
hospital  of  his  calUng. 

Burges  gratis.  Item  whatsomever  person  who  is  not  presently  burges  and  freeman  of  15 

this  burgh  and  entered-  hereafter  burges  gratis  shall  pay  for  his  gildry  forty 
pounds  money  with  xl  s.  to  the  hospital  of  his  calUng. 

Entres  silver.  Item  the  haill  sums  of  money  that  shall  happen  to  be  gotten  in  any  time 

hereafter  for  the  entress  to  be  an  gild  brother  shall  be  deem'iP  in  this  form 
to  witt  all  that  enters  gild  as  an  merchant  or  any  of  their  assisters  shall  be  20 
applyed  to  the  well  of  the  mercht  hospital  and  their  decayed  bretheren  or  to 
any  other  good  and  godly  work*  whilk  may  tend  to  the  advancement  of  the 
common  weill  of  this  toun  and  that  by  the  dean  of  gild  with  advice  of  his 
merchant  council  and  such  other  of  the  merchant  rank  as  he  shall  clause  to 
that  effect  and  all  that  is  gotten  and  received  of  any  craftsmen  or  their  assisters  25 
who  shall  enter  gild  brother  shall  be  applyed  to  the  weill  of  their  hospital  and 
decajed  bretheren  of  the  craftsmen  or  to  any  other  good  and  godly  work 
whilk  may  tend  to  the  advancement  of  the  common  weill  of  this  burgh  and 
that  by  the  deacon  conveener  with  the  advice  of  the  rest  of  the  deacons  of  the 
crafts  of  this  toun  and  their  assisters.  30 

Burges  and  Item  it  shall  no  ways  be  hcentiat  to  any  gild  brother  who  presently  is 

gild  hereafter.  ^^^  burges  and  freeman  of  this  burgh  but  enters  hereafter  to  be  burges  and 
gild  according  to  the  order  set  doun  of  before  according  to  his  habihty  and 
worthjness  to  tap  any  tar  oil  butter  or  to  tap  eggs  green  herring  peers  apples 
com  candle  onions  kaill^  straw  bread  except  baxters  who  may  sell  bread  at  35 
their  pleasure  at  all"  times  milk  and  sikhke  small  things  whilk  is  not  agreeable 
to  the  honour  of  the  calling  of  an  gild  brother. 

Iters.'    M'U.,  W.,  M.,  B. 

W. 


'  'Thirteen.' 

M'U.,  W.,  M.,  B. 

^'Enters.'    M'U., 

w., 

M.,  B. 

Divided.'    M'U. 

,  W.,  M.,  B. 

«  .^fler  '  all ' 

*■  Pious  use.'     M'U. 
read 'licit.'     M'U. 

5  '  Hay. 

LETTER  OF  GUILDRY.  543 

Item  it  shall  not  be  leisom  to  an  simple^  burges  who  enters  hereafter  to  simple  burges. 
be  burges  and  becomes  not  an  gild  brother  to  tap  any  silk  or  silk  work  no 
spyces  nor'  no  drugs  nor  confections  wett  nor  dry  no  lawne  nor  calmeragc^ 
no  stuffs  above  tuenty  shilhngs  the  ell  no  forreign  hats  nor  hats^  with  velvet 
^or  taffalie  (hat  comes  out  of  France  Flanders  England^  or  other  forreign  parts 
neither  to  lap  hemp  linf'  nor  iron  brass  copper  nor  asche  neither  to  tap 
wine  in  pynt  or  quart  great  salt  wax  waid  grane  indigo  nor  any  other  kind 
of  litt  neither  to  buy  nor  sell  in  great  within  the  Uberty  of  this  burgh  salt  beef 
salmond  nor  herring  nor  j'et  to  salt  any  of  them  to  sell  over  again  but  for  their 

10  oun  use  allennerly  neither  to  buy  plaiding  or  cloth  in  great  to  sell  again  within 
this  liberty  nor  yet  to  buy  tallow  above  tuo  stone  together  except  only  candle- 
makers  to  serve  the  use  of  the  toun  or  any  honest  man  for  their  oun  use  neither 
to  buy  any  sheep  skins  to  dry  and  sell  over  again  or  hydes  to  salt  and  sell  again 
neither  to  buy  any  wild  skins  within  this  liberty  as  todds'  above  five  together 

15  otters  not  above  three  together  and  other  wild  skinns  effeiring  sikhke  not  to 

sell  any  kind  of  woolen  cloth  above  thirty  three  shilhngs  four  pennys  the  ell  Woolen  clotb. 
nor  linen  cloth  above  thirteen  shillings  four  pennys  the  ell  except  such  cloth 
as  is  made  in  their  oun  house  whilk  they  shall  have  liberty  to  sell  as  they  can 
best  neither  to  buy  wool  to  sell  over  again  within  this  liberty  neither  to  buy 

20  any  hnnen  yarn  to  sell  over  again  or  to  transport  out  of  this  toun  either  in 
great  or  small  except  only  the  websters  of  this  burgh  who  may  buy  yarn  to 
make  cloth  of  and  sell  at  their  pleasure. 

Item  it  shall  not  be  leisome  to  no  cremmers  to  take  upon  hand   to  Cremmers. 
sett  any  crames  upon  the  hiegait  but  upon  the  Mundays^  and  fairs  allennerly 
25  and  to  use  no  wairs  but  such  as  arc  permitted  to  an  simple'^  burges  under  the 
pain  of  fourty  sliillings  toties  quoties. 

Farder  it  shall  not  be  leisome  to  any  simple^^  burges  or  gild  brother  to  other  mens 
buy  with  other  mens  money  under  colour  and  pretence  that  it  is  their  oun  ""^"^y- 
any  wares  within  the  hberty  of  this  burgh  to  the  hurt  and  prejudice  of  the 
30  freemen  j'rof  under  the  pain  of  tuenty  pounds  money  and  doun  crying  of  their 
freedome  being  try'd  and  convict  by  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  and  that 
in  respect  of  the  great  hurt  and  damage  that  freemen  of  this  burgh  has  sustained 
bj'  such  doing  heretofore. 

Item  it  shall  not  be  leisome  to  any  persons  holding  an  booth^^  at  any  time  Holding 
35  to  crame  upon  the  heigate  but  to  such  as  sells  Scots  cloth  bonnets  shoes  iron    °"*'  ^' 
work  and  sikhke  handywork  used  by  craftsmen  under  the  pain  of  tuenty 
shilhngs  toties  quoties. 

''Single.'     M'U.  =  .'Vfter  '  nor' read  '  suckers.'    W.,  M.  'Sugars.'  M'U. 

'■Cambric'     M'U.  « After  '  hats  '  read  '  lined.'    W..  M.,  B.  '"Ireland.'     M.,  B. 

•■•Omit 'with lint.'    W.  "After  '  todds' read 'not.'  W..  M.,  B. 

8' Wednesday.'    M'U.  "'Single.'     M'U.  "'Single.'     M'U.  "'Shops.'     M'U. 


544  APPENDIX. 

Stands  on  the  Item  it  shall  not  be  leisom  to  any  unfreeman  to  hold  stands  upon  the  heigate 

to  sell  any  thing  pertaining  to  the  crafts  or  handywork  but^  betwixt  eight  hours 
in  the  morning  and  tuo  afternoon  under  the  pain  of  fourty  shillings  providing 
that  tappers  of  Unnen  and  woolen  cloth  be  suffered  fra  mome  to  even  at  their 
pleasure  to  sell  also  all  kind  of  vivers  to  be  sold  fra  mom  to  even  but  Ike's 
unfreemen  who  sells  wheafi  bread  to  keep  the  hours  appointed. 

Simple  Item  all  burgesses  that  enters  hereafter  remaining*  an  simple  burges  if 

pay^foThe        he  gives  up  his  name  to  be  an  merchant  or  any  of  their  assisters  he  shall  pay 
hospital.  ^Q  ^j.,g  hospital  of  his  calhng  five  merks  money  and  if  he  be  an  craftsman  or 

any  of  their  assistants  he  shall  pay  to  the  crafts  hospital  five  merks  money  lo 
and  all  burgesses  that  enters  hereafter  gratis  and  remaining  an  simple  burges 
either  merchant  or  craftsman  shall  pay  to  the  hospital  of  his  calling  ten  merks 
money. 

Burgesestobe  Item  there  shall  be  no  burgeses  made  nor  entered  hereafter  except  that  if 

be  worth.  he  be  an  merchant  or  of  their  assisters  he  be  tryed  by  the  dean  of  gild  that  he  15 
be  worth  the  sum  of  one  hundered  pounds  money  of  free  gear  and  be  booked 
in  his  books  and  have  an  testimonial  to  that  effect  subscrived  by  the  dean  of 
gilds  hand  and  if  he  be  an  craftsman  or  of  their  assisters  he  shall  be  worth 
twenty  pounds  money  of  free  gear  beside  his  craft  and  shall  be  booked  in  the 
deacon  conveeners  book  and  have  the  deacon  conveeners^  testimonial  subscrived  20 
with  his  hand  and  either  of  them  presenting  the  said  testimonials  to  the  provost 
baillies  and  council  shall  be  received  burges  paying  their  burges  fynes  as 
effeirs  otherways  no  burges  merchant  nor  craftsman  to  be  admitted  [or] 
acknouleged  at  any  time  hereafter. 

Pouer  to  the  Item  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  for  observing  of  the  premisses  have  25 

and''unl'a\vsl°^  pouer  to  set  doun  pains  and  unlaws  and  to  mitigat  and  enlarge  the  samen 
according  to  the  time  and  place  person  and  quahty  of  the  trespass  and  farder 
to  make  laws  and  statutes  and  to  set  doun  heads  and  articles  to  be  observed 
for  the  Weill  of  the  toun  and  the  provost  baiUies  and  council  to  approve  of  the 
same.  30 

Unlaws  to  be  Item  the  haill  unlaws  mentioned  in  the  laws  above  writen  and  sick  other 

laws  acts  and  statutes  so  to  be  set  doun  by  the  said  dean  of  gild  and  his  council 
shall  be  applyed  viz'  the  ane  half  yrof  to  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council 
and  the  oyr  half  to  be  applyed  by  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  and  deacon 
conveener  to  any  guid  and  godly  work  they  think  good.  35 

1  Omitted.     W.  --Be.'     M.  =' White.'    M'U.  *•  Freeman  and.'     M'U. 

5  Omitted.     M. 


LETTER  OF  GUILDRY.  545 

Item  it  shall  be  leisom  to  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  [yearly]  to  elect  Collector 
ane  of  their  oun  number  to  be  tresauier  or  collector  of  the  haill  entres  siK'er 
and  unlaws  that  shall  happen  to  be  gotten  who  shall  be  bound  to  make^  count 
of  his  intromissions  yrwith  upon  eight  days  warning  as  he  shall  be  required 

5  to  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  of  the  whilk  entres  silver  of  gildry  he  shall 
deliver  and  make  payment  of  the  haill  that  is  to  be  received  of  the  gild  brether 
of  the  merchant  rank  and  their  assisters  to  be  employed  to  the  uses  forsaid 
and  the  haill  entres  silver  of  gildry  that  is  to  be  received  fra  the  gild  brether  of 
the  craftsmen  and  their  assisters  shall  be  paid  and  delivered  to  the  deacon  con- 

10  veener  to  be  employed  by  him  by  the  advice  of  the  rest  of  the  deacons  and  their 
assisters  to  the  use  forsaid'  and  the  haill  unlaws  that  is  to  be  received  to  be 
delivered  to  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  coimcil  to  be  bestoued  to  the  uses  forsaid. 

Item  it  shall  be  leisom  to  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  yearly  to  chuse  Officer. 
an  officer  for  poinding  and  putting    to  execution  all    the  forsaids  acts  and 

15  statutes  and  to  be  set  doun  and  decreets  to  be  pronunced  by  the  dean  of  gild 
and  his  council  and  for  ingathering  and  poinding  for  all  rents  and  dutys  per- 
taining to  the  merchants  hospital  who  shall  be  alloued  by  the  provost  baillies 
and  council  and  the  haill  toun  officers  to  concurr  and  assist  the  said  officer  in 
execution  of  his  office  so  oft  as  they  shall  be  required  under  the  pain  of  an 

20  unlaw  of  twenty  shillings  money  upon  ilk  ane  of  the  said  toun  officers  that 
refuses  being  desired  toties  quoties. 

Item  the  dean  of  gild  shall  have  pouer  to  conveen  the  haill  merchants  and  Order  for  the 
their  assisters  at  sick  times  as  he  shall  think  expedient  for  order  taking  with  ''°^P''^'- 
their  hospital  and  sick  other  necessar  affairs  as  they  shall  have  to  do. 

25  Item  it  is  thought  expedient  and  agreed  upon  that  the  annuals  of  the  back  Annuals  of 

almoshouse  pertaining  to  the  toun  behind  the  bishops  almoshouse  shall  be  aimoshouse. 
equally  di\-ided  betwixt  the  merchants  and  the  crafts  hospitalls  in  all  time 
comeing. 

Item  it  is  agreed  upon  and  concluded  upon  that  there  shall  be  an  common 
3ometster  of  woollen  cloth  whom  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council  shall  have 
pouer  to  elect  and  chuse^  yearly  who  shall  be  sworn  to  be  leill  and  true  in  sick 
things  as  shall  be  committed  to  his  charge  and  find  sufficient  caution  to  that 
effect'  he  shall  mett  all  packs  of  beds'  woolen  cloth  that  comes  out  of  Galloway 
Stewarton  or  any  other  parts*''  to  be  sold  within  this  burgh  and  shall  have 
35  for  the  metting  of  every  hundered  ells  fra  the  seller  tuo  shilhngs  and  no  other 
but  he  to  mett  this  sort  of  cloath'  also  he  shall  mett  all  other  woollen  cloath 
either  that  is  bought  or  sold  in  great  if  so  be  that  the  buyer  or  seller  require 

'  After 'make' read  •  faithful.'     M'U.  =  Omitted.     MU.  3  Qmitted.    M'U. 

*•  And  that.'    M'U.  =' And  beds  of.'    VV.,  M.,  B.     'Or  loads.'    M'U.  ^.p^^ks.'    B. 

"  'That  is  to  measure  this  sort  of  cloth  shall  measure  any  hut  himself.'    M'U. 
2L 


546 


APPENDIX. 


The  dean  to 
produce  his 
books. 


Dean  1605 
Trumble. 


Deacon 
conveener 


him  upon  the  price  forsaid  and  siklike  he  shall  mett  all  sort  of  plaiding  vvhilk 
is  sold  in  great  to  witt  above  tuenty  ells  and  shall  have  for  the  metting  yrof 
tuo  shiUings  as  it  comes  to  the  hundered  ells  if  the  buyer  or  seller  require  him 
and  no  other  to  mett  this  sort  of  plaiding  but  he  and  farder  he  shall  mett  all 
kind  of  unbleeched  cloath  linen  or  hardin  if  so  be  the  buj-er  or  seller  requires 
him  and  shall  have  for  the  metting  of  ilk  dozen  yrof  fra  the  seller  four  pennys 
and  if  any  persons  in  defraud  of  the  common  metsters  dtiiy'^  metts  and 
measures  the  cloth  and  playding  above  WTiten  whilk  should  be  absolutely 
mett  by  him  he  shall  try  the  samen  before  the  dean  of  gild  and  the  dean  of 
gild  after  tryal  shall  compell  the  seller  or  buyer  as  he  thinks  good  to  pay  to  10 
him  the  double  of  his  duty. 

Item  whatsomever  acts  and  statutes  the  dean  of  gild  and  his  council 
shall  happen  to  make  and  set  doun  farder  nor  is  above  expremed  at  any  time 
hereafter  he  shall  be  subject  to  make  the  provost  bailhes  and  council  acquaint 
yrwith  and  shall  crave  their  ratification  and  allowance  otherwise  to  be  of  no  15 
effect  providing  there  be  a  Hke  number  of  merchants  and  craftsmen  at  the 
ratification  of  the  saids  acts  in  council  and  for  this  purpose  shall  once  in  the 
year  being  required  produce  his  book  containing  his  haill  acts  and  statutes 
before  the  saids  provost  baillies  and  council  to  be  seen  and  considered  by  them. 

Item  it  is  agreed  and  concluded  that  Matthew  Trumble  merchant  bear  20 
office  [as  dean]  of  gild  while  that  same  day  fifteen  days  that-  the  baillies  of 
this  burgh  bees  chosen  for  the  year  to  come  \\ho  has  accepted  the  said  office 
upon  him  and  has  given  his  oath  in  presence  of  the  provost  baiUies  council  and 
haill  deacons  for  dischargeing  of  his  said  office  faithfully  as  becomes. 

Farder  it  is  agreed  and  concluded  that  yearly  in  time  comeing  there  shall  25 
be  an  deacon  conveener  who  shall  be  ever  of  the  rank  of  craftsmen  and  their 
assisters  who  shall  yearly  be  chosen  that  same  day  eight  days  after  the  baillies 
of  this  burgh  bees  chosen  and  one  of  the  most  wise  and  worthyest  of  the  saids 
craftsmen  and  their  assisters  who  shall  yearly  be  lyted  in  time  comeing  in  this 
form  to  witt  the  haill  deacons  of  the  crafts  and  their  assisters  shall  chuse  two  30 
with  the  old  deacon  conveener  to  be  given  in  lytes  before  the  provost  bailhes 
councill  haill   deacons   of    the    crafts  and   their   assisters  who  shall  make 
choice  of  one  of  them  to  be  deacon  conveener  for  the  year  yrafter  foUouing 
with  this  provision  that  there  be  aUke  many  of  merchants  and  craftsmen  at 
the  election  the   deacon  conveener  shall  not  bear  office  excepting"'  tuo  years  35 
together  he  shall  ever  be  an  ordinar  counciler  of  the  touns  great  council  and 
have  an  principal  key  of  the  touns  charter  chest  in  keeping  he  shall  be  sworn 
in  presence  of  the  provost  baillies  and  council  and  deacons  to  do  his  faithfull 
duty  in  his  office  he  shall  conveen  the  haill  deacons  of  crafts  and  their  assisters 

'•Interest.'    M'U.  "After.'    M'U.,  W.,  M.,  B. 

=  ' Exceeding.'     W.,  M.,  B.     'Above.'     M'U. 


LETTER  OF  GUILDRY.  547 

at  sick  times  as  occasion  falls  out  and  shall  judge  betwixt  them  and  any  of 
them  in  matters  pertaining  to  their  crafts  and  callings  and  shall  make  acts 
and  statutes  for  good  order  amongst  them  with  advice  of  the  rest  of  the  deacons 
and  their  assisters  providing  always  these  acts  never  prejudge  the  common 
5  Weill  of  this  burgh  merchant  rank  nor  their  assisters  nor  any  privilege  granted 
to  any  deacon  of  this  burgh  by  their  letters  of  deaconhead  granted  to  them 
of  before  whilks  acts  shall  be  approven  by  the  provost  baillies  and  council 
he  with  advice  of  the  rest  of  the  deacons  and  their  assisters  shall  have  pouer 
to  chuse  an  officer  who  shall  have  pouer  to  poind  and'  distrenzie  being  accom- 

lopanj'ed  with  an  toun  officer  for  putting  of  his  acts  to  execution  as  hkewise 
for  poinding  for  all  rents  annuals  and  dutys  pertaining  to  the  crafts  hospital 
and  what  tovm  officer  refuses  to  assist  the  said  officer  shall  pay  tuenty  shilhngs 
toties  quoties  and  if  any  deacon  iiyith  deacon  or  deacon  with  craft  or  crafts^ 
amongst  themselves  or  their  assisters  refuse  the  deacon  conveeners  judgement 

15  and  the  rest  of  the  deacons  and  their  assisters^  in  matters  concerning  their 
crafts  and  callings  shall  pay  an  unlaw  of  three  pounds  money  to  be  paid  to 
the  deacon  conveener. 

Item  all  prentices  who  shall  become  prentices  within  this  burgh  here-  Prentices 
after  to  an  craftsman  shall  pay  at  his  entry  fourty  shillings  and  tuenty  merks  "^  '^' 
20  of  upsett  he  serving  out  his  prenticeship  faithfully  with  this  provision  that 
burges  sons  pay  but  old  use  and  wont  and  when  he  is  made  an  freeman  he  shall 
pay*  only'  tuo  pennys  and  all  outentouns  men  that  enters  to  be  freemen  with 
any  craft  shall  pay  for  his  upsett  twenty  pounds  [with]  thirteen  shillings  four 
pennys  to  the  crafts  hospital  and  his  weekly  tuo  pennys. 

25         Item  the  deacon  conveener  with  advice  of  the  rest  of  the  deacons  and  Collector 
their  assisters  shall  have  pouer  to  elect  and  chuse  collectors  ane  or  mae  for  conveener. 
ingathering  of  the  rents  annuals  and  dutys  pertaining  to  their  hospital  who 
shall  be  countable  to  the  deacon  conveener  and  the  rest  of  the  deacons  and 
their  assisters  of  his  intromissions  upon  eight  days  warning  as  he  shall  be 

30  required  and  furder  the  deacon  conveener  shall    be  subject    to  produce  his  The  deacon 
book  containing  the  haill  acts  and  statutes  whilk  he  shall  happen  to  set  doun  produce  his 
before  the  provost  baillies  and  council  to  be  seen  and  considered  by  them  yearly  ^°°^' 
when  he  bees  required  and  shall  crave  their  ratification  and  allouance  yrto 
othervvays  to  be  of  no  effect. 

-,-         Item  it  is  agreed  and  concluded  that  Duncan  Sempill  skipper  bear  office  Sempiii. 
as  deacon  conveener  while  that  same  day  eight  days  after  that  the  baillies 
of  this  burgh  bees  chosen  for  the  year  to  come  who  has  accepted  the  said  office 
upon  him  and  has  given  his  oath  in  presence  of  provost  baillies  council  and 
deacons  for  dischargeing  of  his  faithfull  duty  in  the  said  office. 

'Omitted.     W.  '-' Or  deacons  of  crafts.'     M'U.  ^Omitted.     M'U. 

••  .^ftcr  '  pay  '  read  'weekly.'     M,  ''Weekly.'     W. ,   B, 


548  APPENDIX. 

Visitor  of  Item  it  is  concluded  that  there  shall  be  an  visitor  of  maltmen  and  mealmen 

meaimen.  "'ho  shall  be  cliosen  yearly  in  time  comeing  that  same  day  that  the  deacon 
conveener  is  chosen  in  this  form  the  haill  maltmen  and  mealmen  shall  give  in 
four  mens  names  of  the  most  worthy  and  discreet  men  of  the  rank  of  maltmen 
with  the  old  visitor  in  lytes  and  present  them  to  provost  baillies  and  council  5 
who  shall  make  choice  of  ane  of  them  to  be  visitor  for  that  year  and  so  in  all 
time  comeing  and  shall  be  sworn. 

Item  he  shall  take  trj-al  of  these  who  prophanes  the  Sabbath  day  of  their 
calhngs  in  dichting  and  receiving  and  delivering  of  meal  beer  corn  and  malt 
carrieing  of  steep  water  ingleing  of  kilnes  and  siklike  offences  and  the  trans-  10 
gressors  being  convict  shall  pay  to  the  visitor  ten  shillings  by  the  unlaw  to 
the  session  of  the  kirk. 

Item  the  visitor  shall  have  pouer  to  try  all  meal  and  beer  either  in  kilns 
houses  or  booths  (except  freemens  beer  meal  or  malt  coming  to  their  oun 
house  or  to  their  oun  use^  whilk  the  visitor  shall  have  pouer  to  visite  if  he  1 5 
bees  required  by  the  buyer)  or  in  the  markets  and  where  they  find  unsuflicient 
stuff  as  hott  rotten-  or  frost  slain  stuff  either  mixt  amongst  good  stuff  or  be 
Stuff  spilt.        the  alane  and  likeways  where  they  find  good  stuff  spilt  in  the  making  he  shall 
report  the  same  to  the  baillies  and  the  ouner  yrof  to  get  nae  mair  for  the  samen 
stuff  nor  the  visitor  and  tuo  or  three  of  his  assisters  thinks  it  worth  upon  their  20 
conscience  providing  that  the  visitor  and  his  bretheren  give  their  oaths  and 
depone^  before  ane  of  the  bailhes  of  this  burgh*  and  the  party  what  they  think 
it  worth  upon  their  conscience-'  and  if  the  outtentouns  seller  will  not  give  it 
for  that  price  he  shall  take  it  away  with  him  paying  the  custom  of  the  ladles 
Flourished        of  the  toun  and  if  any  beer  bees  tryed  by  them  to  be  flom-isht  with  good  above  25 
^'^"-  and   the  rest  worse''  the  ouner  shall  pay  sixteen  shilhngs  to  the  baillies  and 

Rotten  malt,  ten  shillings  to  the  visitor  and  if  any  malt  bees  found  rotten  and  spilt  in  the 
making  or  good  malt  and  evil  malt  mixt  together  being  sighted  and  so  foimd 
by  the  \isitor  they  shall  report  to  the  bailhes  of  the  worth  yrof  and  if  the 
ouner  please  to  sell  it  within  this  toun  of  that  price  it  shall  be  lesom  to  him  30 
so  to  do  or  to  brew  it  himself  or  to  transport  it  to  another  part  paying  always 
fourty  shilhngs  for  every  making  and  if  any  sick  spilt  stuff  bees  found  with 
outtentouns  men  by  the  visitor  shall  pay  sixteen  shilhngs  for  ilk  mask  the 
ane  half  0/  the  haill  unlaws'  to  be  paid  to  the  bailhes  and  the  oyr  half  to  the 
visitor.  35 

Not  leisome  to  Item  it  shall  not  be  leisome  to  maltmen  nor  nae  other  to  buy  malt  meall 

^yTtuff.""^       or  beer  within  this  toun  either  before  or  in  time  of  market  to  tap  over  again 

under  the  pain  of  five  pounds  to  be  divided  to  witt  the  ane  half  betwixt  the 

1  Omitted.    W.,  M.     '  Or  to  their  own  kilns.'    R  -'Within.'    W.  ^  Omitted,    M'U. 

*  .^fier  ■  burgh '  read  '  on  the  same.'     M'U.  "Omitted.     M'U.  •>' Under  bad.'     M'U. 

''Whereof.'     M'U.     '  Of  the  said  unlaw,'     M.      'Of  the  said  unlaws."    W.,  B. 


LETTER  OF  GUILDRY.  549 

baillies  and  visitor  and  the  oyr  halt  to  be  divided  betwixt  the  merchants  and 
crafts  hospitals. 

Item  it  shall  not  be  leisom  to  nae  person  to  buy  any  kind  of  stuff  coming  Stuff  comein!? 
to  the  market  on  horse  back  or  oyrways  till  it  first  present  the  market  (except  '°  '  ^  ^^^  ^'' 
5  freemen  for  their  oun  use)  allennerly  being  forespoken  or  bought  of  before^ 
and  siklike  the  hours  of  the  market  to  be  kept  both  by  free  and-  unfree  according 
to  the  statutes  of  the  toun  providing  that  freemen  be  suffered  in  seed  time  to 
buy  their  seed  at  any  time-'  they  please  furder  if  any  stuff  be  keept  or  hid  in 
kilns  houses  booths  or  barns  in  time  of  market  except  necessity  constrain 

10  them  to  put  their  meal  in  houses  or  under  stairs  for  wett  and*  fouU  weather 
the  contraveener  of  the  forsaid  statutes  to  pay  viz'  the  sellers  an  unlaw  of 
sixteen  shillings  and  the  buyers  that  buyes  above  an  boll  ane  load  or  more 
shall  pay  to  the  visitor  six  shilHngs  eight  pennys  and  if  any  cake  baxters  bees 
found  buying  meal  before  eleven  hours  conform  to  the  touns  acts  shall  pay  of 

1 5  unlaw  to  the  baillies  sixteen  shillings  and  six  shillings  eight  pennys  to  the 
visitor  toties  quoties  being  tryed  that  they  have  contraveened. 

Item  all  men^  persons  presently  burgeses  shall  have  Uberty  to  make  malt  Liberty  to 
either  to  their  oun  use  or  to  sell  over  again  and  all  burges  sons  that  shall  happen  "^  ^^  '"^  '' 
hereafter  to  use  that  trade  shall  pay  to  the  visitor  at  his  entry  tuenty  shilhngs 

20  and  outtentouns  men  who  marrys  burges's  daughters  shall  pay  conform  and 
every  unfreeman  who  is  not  as  yet  burges  and  enters  to  that  calhng  of  malt 
making  shall  pay  to  the  visitor  of  the  maltmen  tuenty  merks  money  to  be 
bestoued  upon  their  decayed  bretheren  by  the  visitor  with  advice  of  certain 
of  his  honest  bretheren  providing  that  all  persons  freemen  either  present  or  to 

25  come  shall  make  meal  without  any  kind  of  entres. 

Item  the  visitor  of  the  maltmen  shall  have  pouer  to  try  if  any  unfreemen  To  try 
sell  or  tap  any  kind  of  stuff  out  of  the  market  place  and  shall  report  the  samen  '^pp^'^- 
to  the  dean  of  gild  the  seller  to  pay  an  unlaw  of  tuenty  shillings  the  ane  half 
yrof  to  the  dean  of  gild  and  the  oyr  half  to  the  visitor  toties  quoties  being 
30  tryed  before  the  dean  of  gild. 

Item  seeing  the  rubbers  of  meal  is  discharged  by  the  acts  of  the  toun  as  Rubbers  of 
hurtfuU  to  the  common  weill  it  shall  be  leisom  to  the  visitor  to  unlaw  the  ™*^'* 
sellers  in  tuenty  shilhngs  toties  quoties  and  the  said  unlaw  the  ane  half  to  the 
baiUies  and  the  other  lialf  to  the  visitor  and  discharges  the  rubbers^  and  none 
35  to  rubb  or  mett  the  meal  but  the  ouner. 

■  Brackets  close  at  '  before '  not  at  '  use. '    W.     'Befrie.'     B.  =  Omitted.     B. 

3 'Hour.'    W.,  M.  *' Fair  or.'    M'U.  ''Omitted.     M'U.,  W.,  M.,  B. 

5  Ailer  'rubbers'  read  '  and  to  punish  them  according  to  the  statutes  of  the  town  set  down  there- 
anenl.'     W.,  M.,   B. 


550 


APPENDIX. 


Acts  visitor.  Furder  what  acts  and  statutes  the  visitor  with  advice  of  his  bretheren 

being  conveened  as  occasion  occurrs  can  advise^  for  their  weill  nor  prejudgeing 
the  common  weill  shall  be  put  in  write  and  presented  to  the  provost  baiUies 
council  and  deacons  and  they  to  repill  or  allow  the  samen  as  they  think  good. 

TomaliemaJt  Item  every  person  who  enters  burges  hereafter  and  gives  up  his  name  to  5 

be  an  merchant  or  craftsman  it  shall  not  be  leisom  to  him  to  make  malt  for 
the  space  of  three  years  and  if  after  the  ish  of  three  years  he  desire  to  make 
malt  being  an  simple  burges  he  shall  pay  to  the  visitor  of  the  maltmen  ten 
merks  money  and  if  he  be  an  gild  brother  shall  pay  tuenty  shillings  at  his 
entry  and  their  bairns  to  have  the  same  privilege  and  benefite  that  burges  10 
bairns  has  who  now  are  presently  free  also  if-  the  visitor  and  his  bretheren^ 
exerce  dihgently  truly  and  carefully  their  office  committed  to  their  charge  it 
shall  be^  leisom  to  the  provost  bailhes  and  council  to  augment  the  upsett  upon 
outtentounsmen  who  enters  to  be  maltmen  as  the  provost  baillies  and  council' 
shall  think  it  expedient.  15 


Every  making 
of  malt. 


Item  every  making  of  malt  made  by  an  freeman  maltman  duelhng  within 
this  toun  how  many  soever  he  makes  shall  pay  eight  pennys  for  ike  making  of 
malt  and  siklike  every  maltman'^  shall  pay  for  every  crop  or  kiln  of  corn  eight 
pennys'  to  be  applyed  to  the  weill  of  their  decayed  bretheren  providing  that 
freemens  malt  and  com  made  to  their  oun  use  be  free  of  payment. 


20 


The  visitor  to 
produce  his 
book. 


Furder  the  visitor  of  maltmen  shall  be  subject  yearly  in  time  comeing 
once  in  the  year  if  they  be  required  to  produce  before  the  provost  bailhes  and 
council  the  book  containing  the  haiU  acts  and  statutes  that  it  shall  happen  them 
to  make  hereafter  farder  nor  is  granted  to  them^  as  is  above  writen  to  be  seen 
and  considered  by  them  that  they  may  allow  or  repell  the  same  as  they  find  25 
occasion  otherways  to  be  of  no  effect. 


Wallace 
visitor. 


Item  it  is  agreed  and  concluded  that  John  Wallace  maltman  bear  office 
as  visitor  to  the  maltmen  and  mealmen  while  that  same  day  eight  days  after 
the  bailhes  of  this  burgh  bees  chosen  for  the  year  to  come  who  has  given  his 
oath  in  presence  of  the  provost  bailhes  and  council  for  dischargeing  of  his  30 
duty  in  the  said  office. 


Crafts 
assisters. 


And  for  declaration  of  the  crafts  assisters  viz*  they  are  maltmen  mealmen 
fishers  and  all  sick  mariners  and  others  who  pleases  to  associat  themselves^ 
with  the  crafts  for  contribution  to  their  hospital  and  decayed  brether. 


Devise.'    M'U.,  W.,  M.,  B. 
■>  '  And  it  shall  not  be.'    M'U. 
"Omit  'For    .     .     .     pennys.' 


-Omitted.    M'U.  =  After 'bretheren  '  read  '  shall.'    M'U. 

5  '  They.'    M'U.  '^  '  Meilman."    M'U.,  W.,  M. 

B.  8  '  Is  agreed  upon.'    W. ,M.     '  It  is  agreed."    B. 

"Officiate.'     M'U. 


LETTER  OF  GUILDRY.  55i 

And  because  the  forsaid  election  of  the  said  dean  of  gild  deacon  conveener  Conclusion  of 
and  visitor  of  the  maltmen  with  the  statutes  and  privileges  above  writen  giidry'deacon 
redounds  altogether  to  the  advancement  of  the  common  weill  of  this  burgh  conveener  and 

^  _      _  °       visitor  ot 

the  saids  communers  for  themselves  having  pouer  and  commission  granted  maltmen. 
5  to  them  by  the  haill  body  of  the  ranks  of  merchants  and  craftsmen  and  their 
assisters  most  humbly  request  the  provost  baillies  and  council  of  this  burgh 
and  city  of  Glasgow  for  them  and  their  successors  to  ratify  and  approve  this 
present  letter  after  the  form  and  tenor  thereof  in  all  points  and  to  that  effect 
to  give  and  grant  their  express  consent  and  assent  to  the  forsaid  dean  of  gild 

10  deacon  conveener  and  visitor  of  maltmen  and  haill  privileges  statutes  and 
ordinances  particularly  awriten  and  to  interpone  their  authority  yrto  sua  that 
the  samen  may  take  effect  and  have  full  execution  as  is  above  specified  and 
to  ordain  the  samen  to  be  insert  and  regrat  in  the  burrow  court  books  of  the 
said  burgh  to  the  effect  forsaid  yrin  to  remain  in  perpetuam  rei  memoriam 

7:5  and  to  declare  that  all  and  whatsomever  person  or  persons  that  hereafter  shall 
oppone  or  come  in  contrair  of  the  forsd  ke  force  and  effect  yrof  haill  statutes 
and  privileges  awriten  shall  be  repute  and  holden  as  seditious  persons  and 
troublers  of  the  common  weill  of  this  burgh  and  quiet  estate  yrof  and  shall 
incurr  the  nott  and  mark  of  infamie  and  oyrways  to  be  punished  with  all  rigour 

20  In  witness  qrof  this  pnt  writen  by  John  Craig  nott  the  foirsaids  haill  co- 
moimers  for  themselves  and  in  name  and  behalf  forsaids  likeas  the  saids 
provost  baillies  and  council  in  taiken  of  their  consent  and  ratification  yrof  in 
all  points  has  subscrived  w'  their  hands  in  all  points  as  follows  at  day  year 
and  place  forsaid. 

25  Follows   the   subscriptions   first   of    the    merchant     comuners     William 

Andersone  Thomas  Mure  baillies'  Matthew  Trumble  James  Bell  James  IngiUis 
VV™  Stirling-  James  Fleming  Umphra  Cunyghame^  for  Thomas  Broun  in  his 
absence  Ro*  Adame  Jo"  Woddrop  for  George  Muir  Ar<i  Faulhs.  Ita  est 
Arcliibaldus  Heygait  de  mandate  Joannis  Dicksone  scribere  nescieii. 

30  Commouners  for  the  crafts  Jo°  Andersone*  Ro'  Rowat  M"^  Peter  Low 
Duncan  Sempill  M''  Rot  Hamiltoune  Jo°  Mure  James  Fischer  David  Scheirer 
James  Braidwood  Thomas  Fawsyde.  Ita  est  Archibaldus  Heygait  no''s  de 
mandatis  Joannis  Scott  et  VVihelmi  Mure  scribere  nescien. 

Follows  the  ouersmen  S"^  Georg  Elphingstoune  M''  David  Weimis  M"^  Jo° 
35  BeU. 

Apud  Glasgow  nono  die  mensis  Februarij  anno  millesimo  sexcentesimo 
quinto.  In  the  council  house  yrof  produced  before  provost  baillies  and  council 
admitted  approven  and  ordained  to  be  regrat  in  the  burrow  court  books  and 

1  Omitted.     M.  2  Selkrig.     M'U.  S'ColhouD.'    M. 

*  After  '  Andersone' read    bailie. '    W. ,  M,,  B. 


552 


APPENDIX. 


Decreet 

p^-OVOst 

baillies  and 
council. 


in  token  hereof  subscrives  as  follows  the  provost  baillies  and  council  viz* 
S''  Georg  Elphingstoime  pveisl^  W™  Andersone  Thomas  Mure  and  Jo'^  Ander- 
sone"  baillies  Mathew  Trumhle  M''  Peter  Low  W"  Wallace  Ro'  Adame  James 
Lyounc  Umphra  Cunynghame  IF™  Stirling  John  Woddrop  Jo^  Rowat  Jo" 
Mure''  James  Braidwood  James  Fischer  W"  Robesoune  Thomas  PettingrewS 
James  Bell  W™  Wilsoun  thesaurer.  Ita  est  Archibaldus  Heygait  de  mandatis 
Joannis  Dicksoune  et  Wihelmi  Mure  scribere  nescieri. 

To  the  whilk  he  of  dean  of  gild  deacon  con\"eener  and  visitor  of  the  said 
maltmen  the  sd  provost  bailhes  and  council  for  themselves  and  their  successors 
in  office  be  the  tenor  hereof  has  interponed  and  interpones  their  authority  lo 
and  ordains  the  samen  with  all  and  sundry  privileges  and  hbertys  specified 
and  contained  yrintill  as  is  above  writen  to  be  observed  keept  execute  and 
used  be  the  said  dean  of  gild  deacon  conveener  and  visitor  of  maltmen  in  all 
time  comeing  after  the  form  and  tenor  yrof  in  all  points  for  the  common  weill 
of  this  burgh  and  mutual  concord  of*  both  the  saids  ranks  of  merchants  and  15 
craftsmen.     Sic  subf  A  Heygait. 


In  the  council  house  extracted  furth  of  the  records  of  the  magistrats  and 
toun  council  of  the  burgh  of  Glasgow  on  this  and  the  preceeding  tuenty  seven 
pages   by  J.  M<^Gilchrist   dpt    elk. 

1  Omitted.     M'U.  =  Omitted.    M'U.  » Omitted.    M'U.  ■"Omitted.     M'U. 


II. 
Extract    Minute    of   the   Town    Council 


ANENT 


Ranking,   Musters,   Wapinschawing,   etc.* 


Decimo  sexto  Fehruarij  anno  domini  millesimo  sexcentesimo  quinto. 

The  qlk  day  ye  provest  baillies  and  counsall  cairfull  y'  heireftir  all  manner  Anent  rank 
of    muttany  ctiaversie  questioun    and    debait    salbe  removeit   furthe  of  yis  wa^pinschlu- 
cmoune  weill  spea'v  betuix  ye  merchand  rank  and  rank  of  craftismen  v'  the  '°sis  wthir 

11   11.1  I'l-  1-,  assemblies. 

mutuall  band  set  doune  amang  y™  laitlie  anent  ye  deme  of  gild  and  deikin 
conveinar  for  ye  cmoune  weill  of  yis  bru'  and  weill  of  bay'  yair  estaitis  may 
tak  happie  effect  w'out  ony  particular  respect  to  be  had    to    merchand  or 
craftismen  w'  consent  of  ye  deine  of  gild  and  deikin  conveinar  for  yame  selfis 
and  remanent  of  yair  ranks  hes  concludit  statute  and  ordanit  y'  in  all  mustirs 
wappin  schawingis  and  wy''s  leasume  and  lau'full  assembhes  yair  salbe  na 
questioune  stryffe  nor  debait  betuix  merchand  and  craftismen  for  ye  pre- 
rogative or  priviledge  in  ranks  but  yat  they  and  ewery  ane  of  yame  as  ane 
bodie  of  ye  cmoun  welthe  sail  rank  yairselfis  togiddir  but  distinctioune  as  they 
sail  happen  to  fall  in  rank  and  wywayes  as  salbe  thoct  expedient  be  provest 
and  baillies  for  ye  tyme  declairing  be  yir  pnts  q'evir  he  be  merchand  or  craftis- 
man  y'  maks  questioune  mutanie  or  tumult  for  yair    rank    be    prerogative 
prioritie  and  repynes  the  will  and  discretioime  of  ye  provest  and  baillies  salbe 
judgeit  and  repute  ane  seditioune  persone  and  farder  punischt  at  yair  sichtis  Behaviour  of 
and  farder  for  taking  away  of  all  farder  partiaUtie  and  particular  respect  of  '^^jl'j°'fp'^ 
persones  amangst    ye  sds  mchands  and  craftis  if  it  happen  heireftir  y*  ony  conveinar  in 
questioune  or  quarrell  fall  furthe  betuix  merchand  and  craftisman  judicially  betHdx  ^ 
or  be  way  of  deid  ye  deine  of  gild  or  deikin  conveinar  nor  nane  of  vair  ranks  ™'";<=!>and  and 

ir-ii-rr-  aaftisman. 

sail  schaw  y°^selfis  particularhe  affectit  to  ony  of  yair  pairties  in  respect  the 
ane  is  ane  iiichand  or  ye  wy''  ane  craftisman  nor  zit  assist  y°i  or  ony  of  thame 
tumultuoushe  in  judgement  or  wywayes  but  be  cairfull  to  sie  ye  offendar 
condignhe  punischt  be  way  of  justice  attour  becaus  y'  sindrie  burgesis  of  yis 
bru'  q°  they  happen  to  commit  or  doe  wrang  or  trublance  to  yair  nytbo's  w% 
ye  same  pryding  and  wanting  y^selfis  in  yair  freinds  w'out  ye  toune  maks 

*  .As  appended  to  the  weavers'  copy  of  the  Letter  of  Guildry, 


554  APPENDIX. 

Yefriedome  convoca'une  of  yair  freinds  to  compeir  w'  thame  in  judgement  to  ye  grit 
convocatis  his  trubiU  of  yis  bru'  and  judgement  seat  of  ye  same  expres  contrair  ye  lawis  and 
iriends  to  be     ^ctis  of  parliament  thairfoir  lies  concludit  statute  and  ordanit  y'  q'evir  he  be 

cryit  doune.  , 

barges  of  yis  bru'  heireftir  cmitis  trublance  or  falls  furthe  w'  his  ny'bour  and 

maks  convoca-une  of  his  freinds  wtout  ye  toune  to  tak  pairt  w'  him  to  mak 

farder  tumult  w'in  ye  toune  and  in  judgement  his  friedome  salbe  cryit  doune 

and  nevir  estemit  vvordie  to  beir  and  bruik  ye  hbertie  of  ane  burges  friema 

heireftir  but  that  they  camhe  and  quyethe  seik  redres  and  remeid  of  y  wrangis 

The  caus  and    be  way  of  justice  and  siclyk  y'  all  conventiounes  and  meitingis  to  be  of  ye 

offiUd^SKf'"^  deine  of  gild  and  deikin  conveinar  be  onlie  for  puting  yair  statutis  to  execu^une 

deikin  and  cxereising  of  the  Uberties  and  privileges  grantit  unto  y°^  be  provest  baillies 

conveinar  yair  i?-'j 

conventioune.  and  counsall  onUe  for  ye  weill  of  yis  bru'.  Extract  de  libra  aciorum  curiarum 
burgi  clerici  ejusdem  sub  ejus  signo  el  subscriptione  maniialibus.  Sic  sub- 
scribiliir.     Hej'gate. 


III. 


Foundation    of  the   Trades    Hospital.' 


Agreement  among  the  following  Crafts,  viz :  hammermen,  tailors, 
cordiners,  weavers,  skinners,  coopers,  bakers,  wrights,  masons, 
chirurgeons,  bonnetmakers,  fleshers,  maltmen,  fishers  and  mariners, 
and  gardeners,  for  the  support  of  a  Hospital  for  poor  decayed  crafts- 
men burgesses  and  freemen  of  the  burgh,  with  a  Ratification  by 
the  Provost,  Magistrates,  and  Council,  dated  3rd  August,  1605. 

BE  it  kend  till  all  men  be  yir  pnt  Ires  ws  the  deikin  conveiner  deikinis  of  ye 
craftis  of  ye  bur'  of  Glasgow  visito"'  of  ye  maltmen  and  meilmen  of  ye  said 
bur*  haill  assisteris  of  craftis  and  thair  collecto''s  forsameikle  as  we  and  ewerie 
ane  of  ws  be  ye  speciall  grace  of  God  hes  be  our  moyan  travell  cair  and  Industrie 
5  acquirit  conqueist  and  obteinit  the  richt  and  title  of  ye  rwynit  and  decayit 
hospitall  without  the  eist  port  of  ye  said  bur'  foundit  be  vmq"  S''  Holland 
Blacadyr  w'  howss  yeardis  tenementis  anuelis  anuelrentis  landis  possessiounis 
yairof  and  lykwaj'is  hes  conqueist  and  obteinit  vyer  zeardis  anuelis  anuel- 
rentis and  zeirUe  dewties  thairto  and  hes  payit  diveris  and  greit  sovvmes  of 

10  money  to  yame  haveand  ry'  yairof  quha  applyit  ye  rentis  proffeitis  and  dewties 
of  ye  said  hospitall  to  yair  awin  propir  vse  to  ye  greit  hurt  and  miserie  of  ye 
puir  yat  sould  have  beine  placit  yairin  and  lykvayis  be  Godis  grace  purpoising 
to  big  of  new  ye  said  hospitall  for  ye  comfort  of  ye  puir  decayit  craftismen 
burgess  and  friemen  of  yis  bur'  yairin  placit  and  to  be  placit  allainirly  and  cair- 

15  full  yat  sum  ressonabill  moyan  and  rent  by  and  besyd  ye  auld  rent  be  providit 
doitit  mortifiet  and  perpetuallie  gevin  be  ws  our  craftis  rep"^  visito''s  collecto''s 
and  assisteris  of  our  craftis  for  ye  intertinement  of  decayit  brethrein  burges 
friemen  craftismen  and  yair  assisteris  placit  and  to  be  placit  yairin  withe  our 
haill  consentis  and  consent  of  our  brethreine  of  craftis  did  promeis  first  to  give 

20  yairto  tua  pennyis  oulklie  of  ilk  persoune  frie  craftisman  of  our  craftis  and 
yair  assisteris  togidder  withe  thretteine  schillingis  four  pennyis  as  for  ye  vpset 
of  everie  prenteis  admitit  frieman  withe  ye  equall  half  of  ilk  wnlaw  yat  micht 
happin  wnto  ws  and  our  successor's  be  wertew  of  our  Ire  of  deikinheid  and  Ire 
of  gildrie  or  ony  vthervayis  togidder  withe  aucht  pennyis  of  ilk  making  of 

25  malt  and  of  ilk  crop  of  corne  withe  tuentie  schiUingis  of  ilk  burges  sone  that 
enteris  to  mak  malt  to  sell  and  of  ilk  wnfrieman  that  becumis  frieman  and 
makis  malt  tuentie  markis  money  and  now  eftir  mature  advys  deliberatioune 
and  consultatioune  had  of  our  said  hospitall  and  puir  craftismen  yairin  placit 
and  to  be  placit  yat  yai  may  have  sum  suir  lyfe  and  ressonabill  sustentatioune 

*  Copy  from  the  original  document. 


556  APPENDIX. 

yairintill  hes  thoct  maist  meit  and  expedient  that  ane  certane  zeirlie  dewtie 
salbe  givin  doitit  and  mortifiet  to  ye  said  hospital!  and  puir  thairin  placit  and 
to  be  placit  be  ilk  craft  of  ye  said  bur'  visito'  collecto''s  and  remanent  assistaris 
of  ye  saidis  craftis  quha  hes  assotiat  yame  selfis  to  ws  and  our  craftis  and  yat 
in  payment  and  satisfactioune  of  ye  said  oulkhe  tua  pennyis  thretteines 
schilUngis  four  pennyis  of  ilk  prenteis  admitit  frieman  and  half  of  our  saidis 
wnlawis  and  in  satisfactioune  of  ye  said  aucht  pennyis  of  ilk  making  of  malt 
and  crop  of  aitis  and  of  ye  said  tuentie  schilUngis  of  ilk  burges  sone  yat  enteris 
to  mak  malt  to  sell  and  tuentie  markis  of  wnfriemen  yat  becumis  frie  and  makis 
malt  and  yat  for  ye  reddier  and  mair  suir  payment  of  ye  samin  to  ye  said  puir  lo 
placit  and  to  be  placit  in  ye  said  hospitall  quhilk  zeirlie  dewtie  v\-ndirvrittin 
being  frieUe  offerit  be  ilk  craft  of  the  said  bur'  visito""  collecto'^  and  remanent 
assisteris  of  craftis  hes  thairfoir  all  \v'  ane  advj-s  consent  and  assent  and  withe 
advys  and  consent  of  o""  haill  brethreine  of  craftis  for  ws  and  o''  successo''s 
deikinis  visitor's  collectors  and  remanent  assisteris  givin  grantit  doitit  and  1 5 
perpetuallie  mortifiet  to  ye  said  hospitall  and  puir  yairin  placit  and  to  be 
placit  ye  particular  sowmis  of  money  following  be  ye  particular  deikinis  visito'' 
collectors  and  assisteris  of  craftis  vndirwreitin  as  followis  viz  be  ye  deildn  of 
hammirmen  and  haill  brethrein  of  yat  craft  the  sowme  of  tuentie  pundis  money 
be  ye  deikin  of  tailzeors  and  brethrein  of  yat  craft  the  sowine  of  tuentie  pundis  20 
monej-  be  ye  deikin  of  corduneris  and  brethrein  of  yat  craft  ye  sowme  of  tuentie 
punds  money  be  ye  deikin  of  wobsteris  and  brethrein  of  yat  craft  the  sowme 
of  ten  punds  money  be  ye  deikin  of  skynneris  and  brethrein  of  yat  craft  ye 
sowme  of  ten  pimdis  money  be  ye  deikin  of  cowperis  and  brethrein  of  yat  craft 
aucht  punds  money  be  ye  deikin  of  baxteris  and  brethrein  of  yat  craft  sax  25 
punds  thretteine  schillingis  four  pennyis  be  ye  deikin  of  wxichtis  and  brethrein 
of  yat  craft  the  sowine  of  aucht  pundis  money  be  ye  deikin  of  masounis  and 
brethrein  of  yat  craft  ye  sowme  of  four  punds  money  be  ye  deikin  of  chir- 
mgiounis  and  brethrein  of  yat  craft  fyve  markis  and  tuell  pennyis  be  ye  deikin 
of  bonnetmakeris  and  brethrein  of  yat  craft  ye  sowme  of  fyftie  thrie  schilUngis  30 
four  pennyis  be  ye  deikin  of  fleschors  the  sowme  of  ten  punds  money  be  ye 
visitor  of  maltmen  and  mailmen  the  sowme  of  threttie  pundis  money  be  ye 
fischeris  marinelUs  and  remanent  brethreine  of  yat  calUng  assisteris  of  ye 
craftis  the  sowme  of  {  )  and  be  ye  gaimeris  and  remanent 

brethrein  assisteris  of  craftis  the  sowme  of  (  )  quhilk  sowmis  jj 

of  money  particularUe  aboue  specifiet  the  foirsaidis  deikinis  \isito''s  and 
assisteris  of  ye  saidis  craftis  and  collectors  abouevttin  in  satisfactioune  full 
payment  and  for  mair  suir  and  reddier  payment  to  ye  foirsaid  puir  of  ye  said 
zeirUe  dewtie  we  ye  saidis  deikinis  visitor  collectors  and  remanent  assisteris 
of  craftis  and  everie  ane  of  ws  for  ws  and  our  successors  abouevrittin  be  yir40 
pntis  hes  givin  grantit  and  in  perpetuall  almous  mortifiet  lyk  as  we  be  ye 
tennor  heirof  givis  grantis  doitis  and  in  perpetuall  almous  mortifies  to  ye  said 
hospitall  and  puir  yairin  placit  and  to  be  placit  in  all  tyme  cuming  and  bindis 


FOUNDATION  OF  THE  TRADES  HOSPITAL.  557 

obleiss  \vs  deikinis  visito''  colIecto''s  and  assistaris  abouevttin  for  vvs  and  our 
successQi's  zeirlie  to  content  and  pay  to  ye  deikin  conv^einer  of  ye  haill  craftis 
and  his  counsall  or  to  yair  colIecto''s  the  sowmis  of  money  foirsaid  doitit  and 
mortifiet  as  said  is  at  four  termis  in  ye  zeir  viz  Beltane  Lambes  Hallowmes  and 
5  Candillmes  to  be  payit  debursit  and  deUuerit  be  ye  said  deikin  conveiner  and 
his  counsall  or  collector's  at  ye  foirsaidis  termis  to  ye  maister  of  ye  hospitall 
for  ye  tyme  in  name  and  behalf  of  ye  said  puir  and  to  be  payit  and  debursit 
be  him  be  ye  sicht  and  advys  of  ye  deikin  conveiner  his  counsall  remanent 
deikinis  of  craftis  visito''  collectCs  and  assisteris  foirsaidis  \\ithe  powar  to  ye 

10  said  deikin  conveiner  his  counsall  and  j'air  successor's  to  intromet  withe  vptak 
and  resave  ye  foirsaid  particular  so\\Tiiis  of  money  abouevttin  mortifiet  and 
doitit  as  said  is  fra  all  and  sindrie  ye  particular  deikins  visito""  collector's  and 
yair  assisteris  and  successor's  in  all  tymis  cuming  acquittancis  and  dischargis 
to  give  yairvpone  to  vvs  and  our  successors  quhilk  salbe  als  sufficient  as  give 

15  ye  samin  dischargis  war  givin  be  ye  maister  of  ye  said  hospital  and  puir  3'airin 
placit  and  to  be  placit  yairintill  and  give  neid  beis  to  call  and  persew  yairfoir 
in  name  and  behalf  of  ye  said  puir  decreitis  to  obteine  yairvpone  befoir  ye 
proveist  and  baillies  of  ye  said  bur'  admiting  yame  only  judgis  competent 
yairto  and  caus  ye  samin  to  be  put  to  executioune  for  payment  yairof  and  yat 

20  in  full  payment  and  satisfactioune  of  ye  saidis  tua  oulklie  pennyis  thretteine 
schilUngis  four  pennyis  of  ilk  prenteis  admitit  frieman  and  half  of  our  saidis 
wnlawis  togidder  w*  ye  said  aucht  pennyis  of  ilk  making  of  malt  and  of  ilk 
crop  of  corne  w*  ye  said  tuentie  schilhngis  of  ilk  burges  sone  yat  enteris  to  mak 
malt  to  sell  and  tuentie  marks  money  for  ilk  wnfrieman  yat  becumis  frie  and 

25  maks  malt  beginand  ye  first  termis  payment  heirof  at  Lambes  last  bipast  in 
the  zeir  of  God  iajvjc  and  fyve  zeiris  and  sua  fur'  zeirhe  and  termeUe  for  ewir 
as  is  abouevrittin  frielie  quietlie  weill  and  in  peace  but  revocatioun  impediment 
or  agane  calhng  quhatsumevir  randering  thairfoir  ye  said  puir  placit  and 
to  be  placit  in  ye  said  hospitall  and  yair  successor's  yair  continewall  and  dayhe 

3oprayeris  to  God  almichtie  for  our  soverane  lord  ye  kingis  majestie  his  hienes 
quein  and  yair  successioune  for  ye  proveist  baillies  counsall  and  communitie 
of  ye  said  bur'  and  for  ws  ye  saidis  deikinis  visitor'  collector's  and  haill  assisteris 
of  craftis  pnt  and  to  cum  fundator's  of  ye  said  hospitall  for  his  hienes  and 
successor's  happie  ring  and  or'  prosperous  estait  and  siclyk  for  all  vyeris  guid 

35  and  godlie  persounis  yat  happinis  to  found  or  doit  ony  thing  to  ye  said  hospitall 
heirefter  withe  continewall  and  guid  ordor'  to  be  keipit  be  yame  and  y  successor's 
in  ye  said  hospitall  according  to  ye  rewll  and  ordour  to  be  set  doun  in  ye 
foundatioune  of  ye  said  hospitall  withe  expres  provisioune  and  conditioune 
that  give  it  sail  happin  at  ony  time  heireftir  the  said  hospitall  be  ony  caus  or 

4ooccasioune  to  decay  or  be  convertit  to  ony  vther  vse  as  God  forbid  sua  yat 
ye  puir  craftismen  and  yair  assisteris  be  not  interteneyit  thairintill  conforme 
to  ye  said  fundatioune  or  yat  ye  dewties  yairof  be  applyit  to  ony  vyer  vse  nor 
is  abouevrittin  that  than  and  in  yat  caice  ye  samin  dewties  sail  returne  to  ws 


558  APPENDIX. 

and  our  succes5o''5  to  be  bestowit  be  \vs  vpone  our  decayit  brethrein  as  we 
think  maist  expedient  and  to  na  \yer  vse  and  for  ye  wndoubtit  and  perpetuall 
securitie  heirof  we  ar  content  and  consentis  that  yir  pntis  be  insert  and  regrat 
in  ye  burrow  cowrt  buikis  of  ye  said  bur*  in  perpetuam  ret  memoriam  and  have 
strenthe  of  ane  decreit  of  ye  pveist  and  baillies  yairof  and  yat  poynding  and  5 
homing  may  pas  heirvpone  ye  ane  but  prejudice  of  ye  \yir  and  ye  homing  to 
pas  vpone  ane  single  charge  of  sax  dayis  allainirly.  Lykas  ye  saidis  proveist 
and  baihes  of  ye  said  bur'  vndirsubscryveand  for  seting  forward  of  ye  guid 
and  godhe  intentioune  of  ye  deikinis  of  craftis  and  yair  assisteris  be  yir  pntis 
ordainis  yis  pnt  Ire  of  mortificatioune  to  be  insert  and  regrat  in  yair  burrow  10 
cowTt  buiks  and  interponis  yair  decreit  and  aiitie  yairto  for  evir  and  ordainis 
yair  ofhceris  to  pas  in  all  tyme  cuming  poynd  distreinze  waird  and  comprys 
give  neid  beis  yairfoir.  In  witnes  quhairof  to  yir  pntis  wreitin  be  Williame 
Fleming  nottar  at  command  of  Archibald  Heygait  cowrt  clerk  of  ye  said 
bur*  subscrivit  w'  or  handis  and  be  ye  said  pveist  baillies  and  counsall  of  ye  15 
said  bur'  in  taikin  of  yair  autie  interponit  heirto  as  followis  the  greit  seaU  of 
the  said  bur'  at  our  speall  requeist  and  desyre  is  heirto  hungin  at  ye  said 
bur'  ye  thrid  day  of  August  the  zeir  of  God  jajvjc  and  fyve  zeiris. 

Robert  Adem            Sir  G.  Elphingstoun  pro  vest  M"'  Robert  Hamiltone  deacon 

WaRobisoune          Thomas  Mu'' bailie  of  the  chirurgians               20 

\Mmame  Stirlinge    \^'iUia  Anderson  bailie  Ninian  Andirsoune  deikine 

James  Bell                John  Andersone  baiUe  of  ye  cordoners 

U.  ConjTighame       Mathow  Trumble  deane  of  gild  John  Hall  deakyn  off  the 

Ard  FauUis                J.  Forrete  couperis 

James  Braiduoid      Robert  Rowat  Johne  ^^'allace  wisitor  of  ye  25 

Thomas  Pettegrew  M''  Peter  Lowe  maltme  and  meilme 

James  Fischer  Johnne  Rowat 

Jhone  Mwir  M''  Jo"  Ros 

WilUam  Wallace 

Ita  est  Archibaldus  Heygait  no's  de  mandatis  Villelmi  Mwre  decani ^o 
laniona  Joannis  Scot  Joannis  Or  thesaurarii  dti  burgi  et  Joannis 
Dik  ntercatoris  scrihere  nescieh  mann  propria  signauit. 

Ita  est  Mgr  Joannes  Allansone  notarius  publicus  in  premissis  requisitus 
de  madatis  Joannis  Scot  decani  fabrorum  ferrarioru  Georgii  Zoung 
decani  piston'/  Vilielmi  DFdop  decani  laiomoru  Jacobi  King  decani  ■^S 
artis  lignaris  Ricardi  Kirkland  decani  textoru  Andree  Lidfe  decani 
pellionu  Gavini  Nasmy'  decani  artis  pillei  cofectorit  scribere 
nescien  calamuquc  tangen  testanie  manu.  J.  A. 

[Seal  of  the  City] 


IV. 


Letter   by  King   James  VI. ' 


To  our  trusty  and  welbelouedes  Robert  Rowatt,  Mathew  Turnbull,  and 
Thomas  Muire,  citizens  of  o^  citye  of  Glasgow. 

James  R. 

Right  trustie  and  welbeloued.  We  greet  you  hartelie  well.  Hauinge 
understood  the  chief  ground  of  your  differences  in  that  cittie  to  be  a  question 
amongest  the  equallitie  of  marchaunts  and  crafts  in  the  government  of  the 
towne,  and  for  the  remoueinge  thereof,  and  reducinge  your  cittie  to  quietnes 
Haueinge  made  perticular  choise  of  you  to  be  bayliffs  for  this  year  insuinge, 
We  thought  good  to  requier  you  as  haueinge  speciall  interest  in  the  election 
of  a  councell,  to  elect  and  choose  them  of  the  most  wise,  discreet  and  peceable 
men  of  the  cittie,  makinge  the  half  marchaunts  and  the  half  crafts,  accordinge 
to  the  rule  that  we  have  sent  you  herein  inclosed,  wherein  you  shall  do 
acceptable  seruice  unto  us.  And  trustinge  to  find  you  conforme,  Wee  bid  you 
now  right  hartelie  farewell.  At  o""  pallace  of  Whitehall,  the  28  of  Nouember 
1606. 

"From  "View  of  the  ^!erchants  House  of  Glasgow,"  p.  36. 


Ratification   of  the   Letter  of  Guildry 


Extract  ratification  of  the  letter  of  guildry  by  the  Scots  Parliament  extracted  furth 
of  the  records  of  Parliament  by  Sir  Archibald  Primerosc  of  Carinioiin,  knt 
and  hart.,  clerk  to  His  Majesty  King  Charles  the  Second's  council  registers 
and  rolls* 

At  Edinburgh  the  elevent  day  of  September  one  thousand  six  hundreth 

seventie  tuo  yeers  our  soverane  lord  takeing  to  consideration  the  great  and 

many  debaits  differences  and  contests  which  wer  betuixt  those  of  the  merchant 

rank  and  those  of  the  crafts  within  the  burgh  of  Glasgow  in  the  tyme  of  his 

royall  predicessors  and  particularly  in  the  reigne  of  his  maiesties  grandfather 

of  ever  blessed  memorie  vntill  the  veer  jajvjc  and  fyve  yeers  at  which  tyme 

by  the  mediation  interposition  and  endeavours  of  severall  persons  of  quahtie 

and  wise  men  burgesses  of  the  said  burgh  the  saids  differences  came  to  be  setled 

and  composed  and  vpon  the  sext  day  of  February  the  said  yeer  a  submission 

havinge  been  made  following  vpon  a  comission  granted  be  the  great  council! 

for  the  saids  parties  their  entering  in  a  submission  whilk  submission  is  dated 

the  nynt  of  November  jajvjc  four  yeers  whervpon  the  setlement  after  mentioned 

followed  and  is  intituled  the  letter  of  gildrie  deacon  conveener  and  visitor  of 

maltmen  and  meillmen  dated  the  sext  of    February  jajvjc  and  lyve  yeers 

wherin  the  particular  powers  and  authorities  condiscendit  vpon  to  belong  to 

the  saids  respective  imployments  are  speciallie  enumerated  be  the  magistrats 

in  maner  contained    in  the  said  agreement  which  visitors  are  for  visiteing 

mercats  of  meall  and  all  kynd  of  victuall  and  appointed  to  try  the  sufficiencie 

and  insufficiencie  therof  be  vertevv  of  the  whilk  agreement  and  decreit  arbitrall 

the  inhabitants  of  the  burgh  of  Glasgow  have  lived  in  great  peace  vnitie  and 

concord  amongst  themselfs  and  also  therby  good  order  have  been  observed 

in  the  respective  crafts  and  callings  and  orderlie  contribution  made  for  man- 

tenance  of  their  poore  thairfor  his  maiestie  with  expresse  advice  of  his  estates 

of  parliament  ratifies  approves  and  confirms  the  said    gildrie    decreet  and 

agreement  wherby  the  saids  merchants  and  crafts  have  lived  peaceablie  and 

in  good  order  and  the  saids  merchants  and  crafts  have  met  and  made  orderlie 

contributions  for  the  mantenance  of  their  poore  declareing  the  said  decreit 

and   agreement  to  have    the   strenth   and   force  of  ane  Act  of   Parliament. 

Extracted  furth  of  the  Records  of  Parhament  be  me  Sir  Archibald  Primerose 

of  Carintoun  loiight  and  barronet  clerk  to  his  maiesties  councill  registers  and 

rolls. 

A.  Primerose  els  reg. 

*  From  original  extract  in  possession  of  the  Trades  House  of  Glasgow.    See  frontispiece  for  facsimile. 


f 


i 


'■h  fv^fX.  *v** 


M-yi*Oc4- 


■  •>>«*v-rS'" 


A 


,  <r^  '^,v|  t/Sfy{^--y^  c4i 


9f^AiL.  wU^J^i    V^^^Uir^  wty/JyW^Wl  ^rvf-fyHr^tS'  fi  pi  H  u^>:inJf^  d  c/»  97^^rytf^ 

nJio-&-^4-a-n4i  a^ (Xf  /*»*yT /^  tV^WY^Tft  A2i-f--<li^  *>->  <pr^vh  y>»tiT^  i>^pp^^>- a-t,ril  e-trtiro-,ri^ 
nrafii  a-iiJ  m-^Pi*fi  a-n-<)  o-if-vB-iTTry  c  o  tt-^-v-i-h  yi^im    -frirHil-  -Jtrie  Itia-n^n/rut-^  iri  Af  »^  ■*> ^c»-y-}*-v/ 


tr.rtXy 


TZM^mh^ 


Facsimile  of  the  Exlract  of  llie  Ratificalioii  of  the  Leilcr  of  Guildry  by  the  Slots  Parliament, 
dated  nth  September,  idji  (exact  size). 


Index 


2M 


Index. 


Accounts,  trades'  bailie  and  deacon 
convener  to  be  present  at  craft 
comptmakings,   313,   329. 

of  the  hospital  building  fund,  7,   11. 

IG.  19,  21,  25. 

of  the  House  ;   compts  to  be  heard 

regularly,  19  ;  deacon  convener's 
comptmaking,  11,  16.  19,  21,  22, 
25.  29.  37.  47,  51,  59,  64,  71,  78,  87. 
88,  118  ;  collector's  comptmaking, 
6,  42,  89,  95,  98,  103,  106,  109,  112, 
122,  and  Michaelmas  annually 
thereafter ;  deacon  convener  to  be 
responsible  for  the  collector,  112; 
collector's  report  after  the  Restora- 
tion, 364. 

Acts  of  the  House  :  anent  crafts  generally, 
2.  3,  75,  81.  192.  218,  253,  254.  313, 
323.  327.  328.  332.  344,  363,  372, 
381,  432,  500;  particular  crafts— 
CoRDiNERs,  398  ;  Maltmen,  6,  328  : 
Weavers.  149;  Wrights,  50,  254; 
Coopers,  224,  342.  401,  402,  403,  481  ; 
Barbers,  192;  apprentices,  taking 
of,  297.  377  ;  booking  of,  46.  298, 
377.  439,  460  ;  armour,  to  be  given 
in,  125,  270  ;  money  to  be  given 
instead.  297,  306  ;  guildry  fines,  218, 
412;  the  hospital,  3,  21,  52,  70.  161. 
176,  393  ;  the  poor,  344,  367.  395 ; 
quarter  compts,  75,  253,  377,  395. 
See  Byelmvs. 

of   the   Town   Council.      See    Town 

Council. 

Agent  in  Edinburgh  :  his  appointment. 
332  ;    fee,  332  ;    discharge,  417. 

Apprentices  :  names  to  be  booked  in  the 
deacon  convener's  book.  34.  377. 
460 ;  in  their  own  deacon's  book, 
46 ;     a    master    allowed    to    take    a 


second  apprentice,  351  ;  poor  boys 
helped  to  a  craft  by  the  House,  226, 
248,    254,    260,    268,    306,    319,    322, 

341.  342.  351,  377.  400  ;  by  the  Town, 
297  ;  free  booking  of  poor  boys,  298, 
439. 

Apprentices  :   craft  bookings — 

Hammermen  (including  armourers, 
brass-smiths,  coppersmiths,  cutlers, 
goldsmiths,  lorimers  and  pewterers), 
48,  52,  53,  58,  64,  84,  86,  93,  100,  104, 
105,  120,  131.  133,  134,  139,  150,  154, 
178,  209,  218,  233,  261,  269,  319,  320, 
449.  4.50,  453,  469.  470,  473,  474,  480, 
481,  482,  489,  491.  492,  .501.  502,  510, 
516. 

Tailors,  49,  50,  51,  54,  60,  61. 
69,  77,  79,  80,  81,  82,  84,  92,  101,  103, 
105.  106,  108,  111,  114,  116,  120,  127, 
131.  161,  184.  210,  234,  246,  252,  255, 

268,  300,  313,  321,  329,  386,  411,  460, 
461,  404,  470.  471.  472,  473,  474,  480, 
483,  491,  503,  509,  510,  511,  512. 

Cordiners,  3,  36,  49,  51,  52,  60,  64, 
69,  75.  76.  83,  84,  85,  89,  100,  101, 
102,  117,  125,  126,  127,  131.  132,  133, 
138,  139,  141,  149,  165.  203,  210,  218, 
226,  231,  239,  251,  252,  200,  307,  341, 

342,  460. 

M.ALTMEN,  78.  108.  121,"  133.  156. 
251.  290,  296,  328,  332,  367.  451,  452, 
453,  474,  503.  509.  516. 

Weavers,  40,  48,  50,  51.  53,  60,  61, 
64,  70,  79,  80,  84.  89,  91,  92,  93,  95, 
100,  101.  102.  116.  120,  124,  125,  120, 
131,  132,  138,  142,  150,  160,  165,  211, 
217,  225,  240,  241,  247,  252,  260,  261, 

269,  278,  279,  296.  301.  320.  328,  339, 
341.  344,  451,  452,  453,  464,  470.  471, 
472,  474,  482,  483,  490,  513. 


564 


INDEX. 


Baxters,  134,  149,  156,  198,  224, 
247,  269,  278,  307,  312,  318,  450,  451, 
485. 

Skinners  (including  curriers  and 
glovers),  3,  33,  36,  37,  45,  58,  59, 
60,  62,  77,  80,  85,  90,  95,  101,  102, 
104,  110,  111,  116,  117,  120,  126,  138, 
140.  142,  198,  231,  233,  281,  306,  331, 
332,  333,  343,  490,  501,  502,  509. 

Wrights,  36,  54,  69,  133,  219, 
291,  339,  340,  341,  343,  344,  402,  431, 
449,  453,  461,  483. 

Coopers,  45.  46,  50,  76,  90.  121, 
126,  131,  138,  141,  142.  170,  171,  198, 
262,  448,  450,  453. 

Fleshers,  52,  80,  82,  92,  102,  105, 
108.  120,  127.  133,  140,  150,  480. 

Masons,  48,  50,  79,  81,  92.  205,  218, 
300,  339,  348,  450,  462,  493. 

Gardeners,  331,  490.  491. 

Barbers,  190. 

Chirurgeons.  124.  296.  456.  473. 

Bonnetmakers.  61.  77.  133. 

Hatmakers.  480. 

Litsters.  61.  126,  132,  135,  165, 
184.  226. 

Mariners,  89. 

Clothiers,  353. 

Feltmakers,  431,  449,  450,  485. 

Candlemakers,  431. 
Apprenticeship  :  burgesship  in  right  of, 
33 ;  disputes  between  master  and 
apprentice,  217,  332,  333.  340,  341. 
347.  369,  370,  372,  393,  400.  409.  411, 
460. 
Archbishop :  accompanied  by  craftsmen 
to  the  parliament  at  Edinburgh,  20, 
41,  93  ;  to  Ayr,  40  ;  legacy  to  the 
hospital,  167 ;  demission  of  office 
petitioned  against,  472. 
Armour  :  new  deacon  conveners  and 
deacons  to  give  in  armour,  125,  270  ; 
corslets  given  in  by  deacon  con- 
veners, 150,  171.  178,  192,  271  ; 
muskets  given  in  by  deacons,  125. 
132.  150,  155.  156,  165.  171.  178.  184. 
192.  199.  205.  210.  211.  218.  225.  233. 
247.  252,  254,  260,  261,  268,  269.  270, 


271,  290;  dates  fixed  for  giving  in 
muskets.  155.  210.  218.  247,  261,  270  ; 
dressing  of  muskets,  203.  210,  281  ; 
survey  of  muskets.  192  ;  deacon 
convener  to  give  in  sword  instead  of 
corslet.  270  ;  deacons  to  give  in 
swords  instead  of  muskets.  270.  290. 

seized   by  the   English.    297  ;    lent 

out,  298. 

money  ;   new  deacon  conveners  and 

new  deacons  to  give  in  money 
instead  of  armour,  297  ;  money  to  be 
used  for  behoof  of  the  poor,  298,  306, 
314  ;  to  be  paid  before  voting,  306, 
314  ;  money  to  be  sought  in,  307  ; 
payments  by  deacon  conveners.  327, 
389  ;  by  deacons,  312,  318.  327.  347. 
and  subsequent  annual  accounts. 

Auchingray  and  Caldercrooks  :  proposal 
to  purchase.  510  ;  proposal  approved, 
511  ;  expenses  in  connection  with 
purchase,  512,  513,  514,  520  ;  pur- 
chase money,  512  ;  confirmation  of 
the  House  in  the  lands,  513. 

Bailie  interpones  his  authority,  2,  87, 
94,  329,  346,  371.  and  see  Deacon 
Convener's  Council  Judgments. 

,    Trades'.  4.    10.   12,   20.  29.  42.   46, 

53,  63.  71.  77.  85,  91,  95,  103,  106. 
109.  151,  and  Michaelmas  elections 
annually  thereafter. 

.  Water,  234  ;  if  a  craftsman,  to  be  on 

the  deacon  convener's  council.  235. 

Barbers  :  not  to  "  poll  heids  "  on  the 
Sabbath.   192. 

See  under  Acts  of  the  House  and 
Apprentices. 

Baxters  (Bakers) :  contributions  to  the 
building  of  the  crafts  hospital.  6.  10. 
11.  22;  to  its  maintenance  (annu- 
ally), 24.  172.  216,  508.  509  ;  towards 
expenses  of  the  riding  to  parliament. 
20,  41  ;  to  the  Kirk  Session  for  the 
town's  poor,  268  ;  to  the  minister  of 
the  burgh,  13,  18,  19.  27  ;  towards  a 
new  building  at  the  college.  93  ;  to 
the  maintenance  of  the  school   (an- 


INDEX. 


565 


nually),  271  ;  towards  sustaining  the 
town's  plea  against  Dumbarton,  3"). 

:   craft    compts  to  be  reheard,  329; 

deacon  to  have  a  key  of  the  con- 
vener's box,  509. 

See  under  Apprentices,  Deacon 
Convener's  Council  Judgments,  and 
Gorbals. 

Beltmakers,  a  pendicle  of  the  Hammer- 
men, 371. 

Bonds  granted  lor  part  purchase  price 
of  Auchingray,  512,  513. 

,  inventory   of,    238,    276,    289,    304, 

320,  365,  385,  391,  397,  408,  418.  424, 
430,  467.  524. 

:  loans  sanctioned,  155, 177, 178,  233, 

313,  333,  393,  425,  459,  485,  491,  512  ; 
cautioner  relieved,  155  ;  debtor  re- 
lieved,   254  ;     discharged,    283,    313, 

321,  342,  372.  459  ;  interest  remitted, 
331. 

:  not  to  be  taken  without  cautioners, 

231  ;  to  be  put  to  execution,  267,  280, 
290,  296,  310,  321,  331,  350,  365,  377, 
380,  398,  417,  418,  430,  460  ;  to  be 
uplifted.  321,  327.  447.  489.  490.  502. 
508. 

:  report  on,  411  ;    list  revised.  502. 

See  annual  accounts.    See  under  Box. 

Bonnetmakers  :  contributions  to  the 
building  of  the  crafts'  hospital,  7,  8  ; 
to  its  maintenance  (annually),  25, 
217  ;  towards  expenses  of  the  riding 
to  parliament,  20,  41  ;  to  the 
minister  of  the  burgh,  14,  18,  19,  27  ; 
towards  a  new  building  at  the  college, 
93  ;  to  the  maintenance  of  the  school 
(annually),  271  ;  towards  sustaining 
the  town's  plea  against  Dumbarton. 
35. 

:    craft  compts  to  be  reheard.  329. 

:    v/arrand   to  elect  a  collector.  278. 

See  under  Apprentices  and  Deacon 
Convener's  Council  Judgments. 

Box:  bonds  put  in.  100.  104.  119,  141. 
148.  154.  160.  169.  170.  176.  183.  190. 
197.  209.  218.  223.  224,  230.  231,  233, 
234,  240,  246,  259,  268.  275,  279,  291, 


295,  304,  315,  327.  338,  341,  350,  377, 
384,  386,  398,  400,  424,  430,  447,  459, 
460,  468,  479,  489,  499,  508  ;  bonds 
taken  out,  148,  165,  176,  181,  183. 
186,  190,  197,  203,  204,  223,  224.  232, 
233,  240,  242,  246,  252,  259,  260,  267, 
268,  277,  280,  281.  282.  283,  291,  306, 
310,  341,  468  ;  collector's  compt  put 
in.  364  ;  letter  of  guildry  taken  out. 
247 ;  letter  of  guildry  missing  from. 
410  ;  money  put  in,  204,  209,  213, 
210,  223,  233,  240  ;  money  taken 
out,  239,  240;  writs  put  in,  381, 
384,  468,  499. 

:    deacon   convener  has  custody  of, 

251  ;  "  sighted  "  on  the  death  of  a 
deacon  convener,  410. 

:    new,  232  ;    new,  with  more  keys, 

509,  511;  cost  of.  519;  papers 
transferred  to.  511. 

,  old,  given  to  the  weavers,  511. 

Boxmasters,  appointment  of,  46,  60,  69, 
75,  79,  83,  86,  91,  100,  104,  107,  117, 
128,   186,   203,   223,   300,   304. 

,   certain   deacons   of  crafts   to   be  : 

weavers,  508,  509;  baxters,  509; 
hammermen,  511  ;  tailors,  511  ; 
maltmen,  511  ;    cordiners,  511. 

Brandy,  excise  of.  502. 

Bridgegate  properties,  annuals  from,  311. 

Buckets  :  making,  436,  437  ;  used  at  a 
fire  in  the  Gallowgate,  466. 

Bucket  money,  428.  and  annual  accounts 
thereafter. 

Burgesses  :  admission  of,  32,  33 ;  by 
right  of  apprenticeship,  33  ;  deacon 
convener's  testimonial  for  admission, 
45,  46,  50,  51,  52,  58,  59,  60,  61,  62, 
63,   64. 

,  gratis,  not  to  take  an  apprentice,  377. 

Burgess  fines  :  payment  of,  11.  23.  and 
annual  accounts  thereafter  ;  officer's 
vis.,  412. 

Bursary  :  applications  for  and  presenta- 
tions to,  80,  101,  115,  141,  148,  160, 
190,  223,  260.  261.  289.  313.  381.  411, 
438.  448,  468.  480.  500  ;  presentation 
delayed.  377,  380  ;  grant  to  a  student. 


566 


INDEX. 


367;   silver  spoon  for  holder  of  the, 

248. 
Byelaws    of    the    crafts,    ratified    by    the 

House  :   hammermen,  468  ;   weavers, 

472. 
of  the   House :    anent  representa- 
tives, office-bearers  and  officials,  100. 

112,    183,    184,    257,    260,    363,    467; 

anent  money  matters,  19,  231. 
See  Acts  of  the  House. 

Caldercrooks,  see  Auchingrav- 

Candlemakers,  431. 

Chirurgeons :  contributions  to  the  build- 
ing of  the  crafts  hospital,  6,  10  ;  to 
its  maintenance  (annually),  24,  172, 
216,  332  ;  to  the  Kirk  Session  for 
the  town's  poor,  268  ;  to  the  minister 
of  the  burgh,  14,  18  ;  to  the  mainten- 
ance of  the  school  (annually),  271. 

:    deacon  and  master  take  the  oath 

as  members  of  the  deacon  convener's 
council,  386  ;    craft  unlawed,   41. 
See  under  Apprentices. 

Clerk  of  the  House  :  election  of,  12,  21,  29, 
42,  45,  63,  91,  110,  143.  154,  164,  170, 
173,  181,  186,  197,  200,  206,  213,  223, 
231,  246,  267,  289,  293,  363,  427,  434. 
495,  516  ;   joint  clerks.  444,  456,  463. 

:   his   fee,   184,   444,  and   sec    annual 

accounts ;  pension,  147. 

of    the    crafts  :      fee    for    booking 

apprentices,  439. 

Clothier  :  admitted  as  a  craftsman,  343  ; 
takes  an  apprentice,  353. 

Clyde,  the  river,  commissioners  to  the 
King  anent,  26. 

Collector  to  the  House :  election  of,  39, 
42.  83,  86.  91,  104,  107,  117.  128,  135. 
144,  154,  157,  162,  170,  173.  181,  ISO, 
197,  200,  206,  213.  223.  227.  246,  251, 
257,  267,  275,  289,  293,  304,  309,  315, 
318,  325,  338,  350,  363,  377,  382,  391, 
395.  408,  417,  424,  430,  438,  444,  459, 
467,  479,  488.  500,  507,  521. 

,  deacon  convener  as,  112. 

:    to   hold   office   for  one  year  only, 

260  ;    to  be   paid   a  fee,    100,   467  ; 


not  to  be  paid,  260  ;  to  collect  the 
small   annuals,    467. 

See  under  .Accounts  of  the  House. 

of    small     annuals  :      appointment 

of,  197,  425,  439;  his  comptmaking, 
204,  209,  216,  223,  230,  237,  246,  251, 
260,  267,  296,  306,  312,  327,  338,  350, 
384,  395,  417.  418,  448,  468,  and 
annual  accounts  thereafter  ;  finds 
caution,  419;  collector  to  the  House 
to  be,  467. 

College,  contributions  towards  a  new 
building  at  tlie.  92,  100. 

Common  bargains,  division  of,  among 
craftsmen,  191,  241,  401,  402,  403, 
481. 

Contributions  by  the  crafts  to  the  build- 
ing of  the  crafts  hospital,  6,  7,  8,  10, 
11,  16;  to  its  maintenance,  sec 
under  Hospital ;  for  defence  of  the 
guildry,  439.  440,  441,  442;  towards 
expenses  of  commissioners  going  to 
London,  26  ;  towards  expenses  of 
the  riding  to  parliament,  20,  41  ;  to 
the  Kirk  Session  for  the  town's  poor, 
217,  268,  269  ;  to  the  minister  of  the 
burgh,  13,  18,  19,  26  ;  towards  a  new 
building  at  the  college,  92  ;  to  the 
maintenance  of  the  school  (annually), 
271  ;  for  powder,  198  ;  for  a  tent, 
198. 
See  Taxation. 

by    the   House  :     towards   a  bridge 

at  Natham  Foot,  160  ;  towards  a  new 
building  at  the  college.  93,  100. 

Convention  of  Burghs,  act  of,  anent  those 
disaffecting  the  king's  government, 
361,  366,  369. 

Coopers  :  contiibutions  to  the  building 
of  the  crafts  hospital.  6,  8,  12  ;  to 
its  maintenance  (annually),  24,  172. 
216  ;  towards  expenses  of  riding  to 
parliament,  41  ;  to  the  Kirk  Session 
for  the  town's  poor,  268 ;  to  the 
minister  of  the  burgh,  14.  18.  19,  27; 
towards  a  new  building  at  the  college, 
93  ;  to  the  maintenance  of  the  school 
(annually),   271  ;   towards  sustaining 


INDEX. 


567 


the  town's  plea  against  Dumbarton, 
34. 

;    craft    to    sustain    its    own    poor, 

198  ;  deacon  convener  to  be  present 
at  the  craft's  comptmakings,  225  ; 
deacon  unlawed.  241  ;  officer  iin- 
lawcd,  343  :  a  master  allowed  to 
take  a  second  apprentice,  351  ; 
dispute  anent  election  of  deacon,  387  ; 
freedom  fines,  401. 

:      division     of     common     bargains, 

241,  401,  402,  403;  purchase  of 
"  stingjs,"  342. 

See  under  Acts  of  the  House,  Ap- 
prentices, Deacon  Convener's  Council 
Judgments,  and   Gorbals. 

Cordiners :  contributions  to  the  building 
of  the  crafts  hospital,  8,  12;  to  its 
maintenance  (annually).  24,  171,  216, 
511  ;  towards  expenses  of  riding  to 
parliament,  41  ;  to  the  Kirk  Session 
for  the  town's  poor,  268 ;  to  the 
minister  of  the  burgh.  13.  18.  19.  27  ; 
towards  a  new  building  at  the  college, 
92  ;  to  the  maintenance  of  the  school 
(annually),  271  ;  towards  sustaining 
the  town's  plea  against  Dumbarton, 
34. 

:  booking  money  of  stranger  journey- 
men, 398  ;  complaint  against  the 
skinners  infringing  craft  liberties, 
339,  340  ;  complaint  by  the  hammer- 
men against  the  craft,  371  ;  deacon 
has  a  key  of  the  convener's  box,  511  ; 
craft  representatives  on  the  deacon 
convener's  council,  268  ;  member  of 
craft  classed,  232. 

See  under  Acts  of  the  House,  Ap- 
prentices, Deacon  Convener's  Council 
Judgments,  and  Gorbals. 

Cromwell's  coin,   383. 

Cross  properties,  annuals  from,  310. 

Curriers,  a  pendicle  of  the  skinners,  333. 

Deacon  Convener  :  leet  for  and  election 
of,  3,  4,  6.  9,  10,  20,  28.  35.  42,  45, 
53,  63,  70,  76,  82,  85,  90,  94,  102, 
106,  108,  111,  117,  121,  127,  134,  143, 


150,  and  Michaelmas  elections  an- 
nually thereafter,  also  251,  261, 
298,  351  ;  leet  rejected  by  Town 
Council,  242,  357 ;  protestation 
against  selection  of  leet,  356  :  preces 
appointed,  357  ;  petition  to  Town 
Council,  358  ;  overtures  for  peace. 
358,  359,  360 ;  new  leet  selected, 
361  ;    manner  of  leeting,  3. 

,  special  gift  to  the  poor  by,  59. 

to  give  account  of  his  intromissions 

annually,  19  ;  to  have  insignia  of 
office,  40  :  old  bend  sold,  66  ;  new 
bend  purchased,  68  ;  to  act  as 
collector,  112;  to  give  in  armour, 
125,  270 ;  gives  in  corslets,  150, 
171,  178,  192,  271  ;  to  give  in 
money  instead  of  corslets,  297  ;  to 
make  payment  before  he  can  vote, 
306 ;  gives  in  armour  money,  327,  389. 

,  wTonging  of,  act  anent,  323. 

depute,    1. 

Deacon  Convener's  Council  :  members  of, 
4,  6,  10,  12,  20,  29,  35,  42,  46,  53,  63, 
71,  77,  83,  85,  91,  95,  103,  106,  109, 
111,  117,  122,  127,  134,  144,  151,  and 
Michaelmas  elections  annually  there- 
after, also  251,  262,  268,  299  ;  certain 
persons  disqualified  by  order  of  Town 
Council,  263  ;  late  deacons  to  be 
members,  257  ;  water  bailie,  if  a 
craftsman,  to  be  a  member,  235  ; 
late  deacon  convener  to  be  an  extra- 
ordinary member,  324  ;  special  extra- 
ordinary member,  374 ;  gardeners' 
representation  on,  75;  increased, 
434  ;  weavers'  representation  in- 
creased, 509. 

:     judgments    by,    in    craft    affairs 

generally,  2,  41,  50,  62,  70,  75, 
82,  232,  278,  323,  328  ;  in  craft 
complaints  —  Hammermen,  81,  143, 
179,  331,  333,  351,  353,  355,  369, 
371,  372,  378.  379,  380,  392; 
Tailors,  84,  225,  226,  283  ;  Cordin- 
ers, 314,  414;  Maltmen,  1,  2,  114. 
510  ;  Weavers,  76,  82,  105,  107,  115. 
148;      Baxters,     329,     332,     364; 


568 


INDEX. 


Skinners,  344,  345,  347,  387 ; 
Wrights,  49,  69,  70,  93,  139,  254, 
322,  351,  352,  401,  403,  460,  470.  482; 
Coopers,  86,  138,  140,  191,  241,  277, 
343,  363,  367,  372,  387,  401,  402,  403, 
414,  420,  481  ;  Fleshers,  371,  420, 
461  ;  Gardeners,  270 ;  Bonnet- 
makers,  48,  86,  121  ;  Litsters,  322, 
329,  330  ;  decreets  rescinded,  368  ; 
in  disputes  between  crafts,  9,  27,  177, 
338,  339,  340,  371  ;  in  disputes 
between  master  and  apprentice,  217, 
332,  333,  340,  341,  347.  369.  370.  372. 
393.  400,  409,  411,  460. 

Deaconry,  letters  of,  called  in  question 
by  the  Town  Council,  358,  359. 

Deacons  of  crafts  :  choosing  of,  to  be  on 
a  specified  day,  76  ;  acts  anent  who 
shall  vote  at  their  election,  81,  327  ; 
act  anent  wronging  of,  323. 

:    to  obey  the   deacon   convener  in 

lawful  matters,  75 ;  to  be  guild 
bretlaren,  254 ;  to  hold  office  for 
one  year  only,  363,  364  ;  may  hold 
office  for  longer  than  a  year,  432, 
500  ;  to  give  in  armour,  125,  270  ; 
give  in  muskets,  125,  132,  150,  155, 
156,  165,  171,  178,  184,  192,  199, 
205,  210,  211,  218,  225,  233,  247,  252, 
254,  260,  261,  268,  269,  270,  271,  290; 
dates  fixed  for  giving  in.  155,  210, 
218,  247,  261,  270  ;  to  give  in  swords, 
290  ;  to  give  in  money  instead  of 
armour,  297 ;  pay  in  armour 
money,  312,  318,  327,  347,  and 
subsequent  annual  accounts ;  to 
make  payment  before  they  can  vote, 
306,  314. 

,  late,  to  be  on  the  deacon  convener's 

council,  257,  363  ;  to  be  masters  of 
craft,  363. 

Dean  of  Guild  Lyners  :  leets  for  and 
election  of,  5,  9,  21,  29,  35,  42,  46, 
53,  63,  71,  78,  83,  85,  90,  103,  106. 
109,  111,  117.  121,  128,  134,  144,  151, 
and  Michaelmas  elections  annually 
thereafter,  also  267,  300,  351  ;  manner 
of  leeting,  6. 


Demarcation  of  work,  controversies  be- 
tween crafts  anent.  9.  27,  177,  338, 
339,   340,   371. 

Differences  among  the  craftsmen  of  the 
burgh,  356-361  ;  partv'  favouring  the 
English  debarred  from  holding  office, 
361,  366,   368. 

Dividers  of  their  calling,  act  anent,  332. 

Dollars,  rex,  352. 

Drygate  properties,  annuals  from,  310. 

Dumbarton,  crafts  taxed  to  sustain  the 
town's  plea  against,  34. 

Dumbuk  fuird,  weeding  of.  41. 

Dundee,  aid  given  to  a  former  deacon 
convener  in,  169. 

English  :  a  section  of  the  craftsmen  favour 
the,  361  ;  these  craftsmen  debarred 
from  holding  office,  361,  366,  368. 

E.xcise :  of  brandy,  502 ;  of  malt,  328, 
403,  404,  419.  425.  448  ;    of  salt,  353. 

Feltmakcrs,  431,  449,  450,  485. 

Feu  duties,  decreets  against  those  liable 
in,   387. 

See  Hospital  old  rental. 

Fleshers  :  contributions  to  the  building 
of  the  crafts  hospital,  6,  10  ;  to  its 
maintenance  (annually),  25,  172,  217; 
towards  expenses  of  the  riding  to 
parliament,  20,  41  ;  to  the  Kirk 
Session  for  the  town's  poor.  268  ;  to 
the  minister  of  the  burgh,  14.  18,  19, 
27  ;  towards  a  new  building  at  the 
college,  93  ;  to  the  maintenance  of 
the  school  (annually),  271  ;  towards 
sustaining  the  town's  plea  against 
Dumbarton,  35. 

:     craft's    compts     to     be     reheard. 

329  ;  deacon  unlawed,  70  ;  letter  of 
deaconry  and  compt  book  produced 
before  the  deacon  convener's  council, 
420  ;  forcbargains  with  the  skinners, 
387. 

See  under  Apprentices,  Deacon 
Convener's  Council  Judgments,  and 
Gorbals. 

Forestalling  the  market,  387. 


INDEX. 


569 


Funds  of  the  House,  report  to  be  made 
on  the  state  of,  305,  41'J. 

Gallowgate  properties,  annuals  from,  311. 

Gardeners :  contributions  to  the  main- 
tenance of  the  crafts  hospital  (an- 
nually), 75.  172,  434;  towards 
expenses  of  the  riding  to  parliament, 
41  ;  to  the  Kirk  Session  for  the  town's 
poor,  268  ;  to  the  maintenance  of  the 
school  (annually),  271  ;  towards  sus- 
taining the  town's  plea  against  Dum- 
barton, 35. 

:  entered  with  the  crafts,  75  ;  repre- 
sentation on  the  deacon  convener's 
council  increased,  434. 

See  under  Apprentices,  and  Deacon 
Convener's  Council  Judgments. 

Gifts  to  the  poor  of  the  crafts  hospital. 
See  under  Hospital. 

Glovers,  a  pendicle  of  the  skinners,  306. 

Gorbals  :  purchase  of  a  fourth  part  of  the 
lands  of,  278,  279 ;  expenses  in  connec- 
tion with,  280,  282 ;  House's  share  in 
purchase  of,  279,  282.  287,  305,  524 ; 
bonds  to  be  uplifted  for  payment  of 
House's  share,  280,  281,  282,  283,  305  ; 
crafts'  shares  in — Hammermen,  279, 
282,  303,  308,  313,  316,  524  ;  Tailors, 
279,  282,  297,  303,  308,  309,  314,  327, 
335,  524  ;  Cordiners,  279,  282,  303, 
308,  524  ;  M.\ltmex.  279,  282,  303, 
308.  524  ;  Weavers,  279,  282,  303, 
308,  317,  524  ;  Baxters,  279,  282, 
524 ;  Skinners,  279,  282,  524  ; 
Wrights,  279,  282,  305,  308,  524  ; 
Coopers,  279,  282,  303,  308.  313,  316, 
524  ;  Fleshers,  279,  282,  524 ; 
Masons,  279,  282,  524. 

lands  :  tacks  to  be  drawn  up,  341. 

386,  408,  489,  495,  501  ;  signing  of 
tacks,  376  ;  tacks  to  be  subscribed 
by  the  deacon  convener,  344,  400. 
448  ;  by  the  deacon  convener  ant' 
collector,  490,  495  ;  collector  of  rents 
appointed,  281,  319,  321  ;  his  fee, 
349  ;  his  comptmaking,  313,  314,  333, 
343,  372,  377.  380,  386,  387,  388,  393, 


403,  404,  411.  412,  421,  424,  432,  441, 
454,  461,  474,  483,  492,  503,  514  ; 
House's  and  crafts'  shares  of  rents, 
293,  307,  308,  313,  314,  316,  336,  337, 
348,  349,  351,  359,  360,  366,  375.  and 
subsequent  annual  accounts. 

,  blue  coats,  466. 

:    relations   with    the    craftsmen    of, 

342  ;  petition  to  the  House  by  the 
Glasgow  weavers  anent  the  Gorbals 
weavers,  298. 

Greenock,  encroachment  of,  on  Glasgow's 
liberties,  491,  492. 

Guild  brethren,  craft  office-bearers  and 
representatives  to  be,  2,  3,  254,  381  ; 
craftsmen  charged  to  become,  424. 

Guildry,  defence  of :  commissioners  to 
confer  with  Edinburgh  craftsmen, 
370,  439  ;  their  expenses,  376  ;  con- 
tributions by  the  crafts,  439,  440,  441, 
442 ;  conference  with  the  provost, 
439  ;  commissioner  to  London,  440  ; 
his  expenses,  440,  441,  453  ;  his 
report,  440,  441  ;  commissioners  to 
Edinburgh  to  thank  certain  noblemen 
for  their  help,  441  ;  steps  approved 
and  ratified,  454. 

,  letter  of :  missing  from  the  box,  410  ; 

ratification  of,  by  parliament,   461  ; 
expenses    in    connection    with,    461, 
4G2  ;  put  in  the  box,  462. 
See  Appendix. 

fines :  to  be  applied  in  relief  of  the 

town's  debt,  27  ;  not  to  be  modi- 
fied, 218,  253  ;  payments  of,  197, 
198,  217,  240,  283,  309,  321,  322, 
327,  393,  420,  and  annual  accounts  ; 
bonds  for,  239,  241,  246,  295,  297, 
331,  341,  353,  431,  447;  overcharge 
remitted,  268,  481  ;  time  to  be 
given  for  payment,  352 ;  names 
of  those  unable  to  pay  to  be  given 
in,   380. 

Hammermen  :  contributions  to  the 
building  of  the  crafts  hospital,  6,  8  ; 
to  its  maintenance  (annually),  24, 
171,  511  ;    towards  expenses  of  the 


570 


INDEX. 


riding  to  parliament,  20,  -11  ;  to  the 
Kirk  Session  for  the  town's  poor, 
268  ;  to  the  minister  of  the  burgh, 
13,  18,  27;  towards  a  new  building 
at  the  college,  92  ;  to  the  mainten- 
ance of  the  school  (annually).  271  ; 
towards  sustaining  the  town's  plea 
against  Dumbarton,   34. 

:     complaint     against     the     tailors 

infringing  their  privileges,  338  ; 
against  the  cordiners,  371  ;  join  with 
the  Wrights  in  a  complaint  before  the 
town  council,  351  ;  skinners  com- 
plain against  hammermen  craftsmen 
infringing  their  liberties,  177. 

:  craft  unlawed,  41  ;  craft  pendicles, 

378  ;  deacon  has  a  key  of  the 
convener's  box,  511  ;  deacon  to  re- 
store money  wrongously  taken  from 
the  poor  box,  380  ;  deacon  unlawed, 
75 ;  entry  deleted  from  the  craft's 
minute  book.  369,  372  ;  entry  money 
for  strangers,  469  ;  notary  made  a 
freeman,  140  ;    poor  of  craft,  380. 

See  under  Apprentices.  Byelaws, 
Deacon  Convener's  Council  Judgments. 
and  Gorbals. 

Hatmakers,   480. 

Hospital  :  crafts'  contributions  to  the 
building  of,  1,  6,  7,  8,  10,  20;  col- 
lector of  contributions,  8,  20  ;  his 
comptmaking,  11.  16.  19.  21.  25; 
master  appointed,  3  ;  his  compt- 
making, 7  ;  master  of  work,  18,  61  ; 
writs,  5,  7,  69  ;    proposal  to  rebuild, 

399  ;    crafts  offer  to  contribute.  390. 

400  ;  report  as  to  expense,  399.  400  ; 
preparation  of  plans,  399,  400. 

,    maintenance   of:     new   rental,    11, 

22,  24,  and  subsequent  annual  ac- 
counts, also  170.  171,  216,  see  also 
Quarter  accounts:  old  rental.  11,  18, 
22,  24,  and  subsequent  annual  ac- 
counts.also  310;  collector  of  old  rental. 
197,  425,  439  ;  caution  for,  419  ;  his 
comptmaking,  204,  209,  216,  223, 
230,  237,  246,  251.  260,  267,  296,  306, 
312,  327,  338,  350,  384.  395,  417,  418, 


448,  468  :  collector  of  the  House  to  in- 
gather  old  rental,  467 ;  rental  pertain- 
ing to  the  beds  of  the  back  almshouse, 
47,  54,  55,  and  subsequent  accounts. 
Sec  also  Appendix,  Deed  of  Foun- 
dation. 

:    bell    for,    176.    177,    183;    legacies 

to  the  poor  of,  16,  31,  66,  78,  87,  88, 
89,  96,  98,  105,  107,  112,  123,  129, 
136,  145,  158,  163,  167,  169,  173,  174, 
187,  201,  204,  207,  213,  214,  219,  221. 
222,  224,  229,  244,  246,  278,  285,  317  ; 
gifts  to  the  poor  of,  31.  59,  65.  72,  78, 
114,  144,  152,  195,  402;  purchase  of 
land  adjoining,  155,  399  ;  house  and 
yard  gifted  to,  246,  252. 

stead,  feu  granted  ofi,  25. 

Hospitallers  :  poor  craftsmen  admitted 
as,  21,  39,  45,  52,  62,  75,  90,  100,  105, 
107,  110,  116,  128,  132,  148,  150,  154, 
160,  165,  178.  183,  197,  204,  217,  224, 
232,  239,  242,  246,  251,  253,  267,  269, 
270,  278,  280,  283,  290,  295.  320.  343, 
352,  356,  366,  368,  384,  399,  412,  433, 

438,  472,  490  ;  their  supervision,  291  ; 
exercise  of  discipline,  39,  48,  70,  90, 
116,  155,  156,  177,  280,  319,  347,  438, 

439,  480;  their  supply,  150,  170,  171, 
176,  216,  231.  and  annual  accounts  ; 

■  regulations   anent,    21,   52,    70,    161. 
176,  393. 

,  crafts  having,  to  support  their  own 

general  poor,  367. 
Hutchesons'  Hospital,  281,  283. 

Ill  money,  roup  of,  350. 

Investments,  see  Bonds,  Properties,  and 
Ventures. 

Ireland,  payments  to  poor  persons  coming 
from,  217.  230  ;  payments  to  crafts- 
men robbed  in,  218,  219. 

Journeymen  craftsmen,  306,  398,  414. 

King  :  commissioners  to  the.  26  ;  letters 
from,  217,  291,  372,  and  Appendix  ; 
petition  to,  for  ratification  of  the 
town's  liberties,  34  ;  petition  for 
ratification   of   the   crafts'  liberties. 


INDEX. 


571 


see  Guildry  ;    petition  ancnt  election 

of  magistrates,    sec    Toion  Council  ; 

stent  granted  to,  403,  404. 

,  restoration  of  the,  3G1,  30S. 

Kirk  Session,  crafts'  contribution  given  to, 

for  help  of  the  poor,  217,  268,  269. 

Leeting,  manner  of,  in  election  of  deacon 

convener,  3  ;    in  election  of  dean  of 

guild  lyners,  5. 
Legacies,  see  under  Hospital 
License,    part   money   from,   refunded   to 

dean  of  guild,  350. 
Litsters  :  contributions  to  the  maintenance 

of  the  crafts  hospital  (annually),  129, 

172. 

See  under  Appyeniiccs. 

Magistrates,  not  to  be  troubled  with 
ordinary  craft  causes,   372. 

,   election   of  :     crafts  join   with    the 

Town  Council  in  representations 
anent,  211  ;  crafts'  commissioners. 
211  :    their  expenses,  211,  216. 

Malt,  excise  of,  328,  403,  404,  419,  425, 
448. 

Maltmen,  acknowledgment  of  visitor  by 
men  of  the  calling,  1,  2. 

:    contributions    to   the   building  of 

the  crafts  hospital,  1,  0,  7  ;  to  its 
maintenance  (annually),  25,  171,  217, 
511  ;  towards  expenses  of  the  riding 
to  parliament,  41  ;  to  the  Kirk  Ses- 
sion for  the  town's  poor,  268  ;  to 
the  minister  of  the  burgh,  13,  18,  19, 
27  ;  towards  a  new  building  at  the 
college,  93  ;  to  the  maintenance  of  the 
school  (annually),  271  ;  towards  sus- 
taining the  town's  plea  against  Dum- 
barton, 35. 

:  visitor  has  a  key  of  the  con- 
vener's box,  511  ;  mortcloths  of  the 
House  sold  to  the  craft.  327  ;  quar- 
terly payments  by  those  making 
malt,   6. 

See  under  Acts  of  the  House,  Ap- 
prentices, Deacon  Convener's  Council 
Judgments,  and  Gorbals. 


Masons :  contributions  to  the  building 
of  the  crafts  hospital,  7,  10,  12  ;  to 
its  maintenance  (annually),  24,  172, 
210  ;  towarils  expenses  of  riding  to 
parliament,  20,  41 ;  to  the  Kirk 
Session  for  the  town's  poor,  268  ;  to 
the  minister  of  the  burgh,  14.  18.  27  : 
towards  a  new  building  at  the  college, 
93  ;  to  the  maintenance  of  the  school 
(annually),  271  ;  towards  sustaining 
the  town's  plea  against  Dumbarton, 
35. 

:    dispute   with   the   wrights,   9,  27  ; 

petition  with  the  wrights  for  re- 
straint of  strangers,  343  ;  petition 
to  deacon  convener's  council  ancnt 
slaters  entering  freemen,  402  ;  rati- 
fication to  be  obtained  from  the  Town 
Council,  403. 

See  under  Apprentices  and  Gorbals. 

Merchants,  convention  with,  ancnt  the 
town's  debt,  7. 

Militia,  horse,   437. 

Minister  :  crafts'  contribution  to,  13,  18, 
19.  26  ;  Town  Council's  presentation 
to  Blackfriars  Kirk  approved,  177  ; 
admission  of,  232  ;  crafts  petition 
against  the  translation  of,  253. 

Minute  book  of  the  House,  361,  368. 

Mortification,  deed  of,  John  Colquhoun's, 
522. 

Mortcloths  :  purchase  of,  59  ;  charges 
made  for  use,  59  ;  moneys  received 
for  hire,  66,  and  subsequent  annual 
accounts  till  1653  ;  roup  of,  327  ; 
funds  of  House  suffer  by  disposal,  419. 

Nathum  Foot,  bridge  at,  160. 
Newport,  501. 

Office-bearers,  to  be  guild  brethren,  2,  3. 

Officer  :  appointment  of,  29,  42,  48,  59, 
63,  135,  154,  164,  176,  186,  203,  206, 
223,  231,  246,  251,  267,  289,  356,  363. 
427,  430,  434,  444,  456,  463,  495;  his 
fee,  100,  183,  412  ;  his  uniform,  41, 
164,  176,  248,  300,  342,  367,  439,  448, 
498,  499,  and  sec  accounts. 


572 


INDEX. 


Pendicles  of  crafts  :  among  the  hammer- 
men, 379  ;    among  the  wrights,  471. 

Pewterer  from  London,  378. 

Philiphaugh,  321. 

Poll  money,  419. 

Poor  :  craftsmen  admitted  to  the 
hospital,  see  Hospitallers :  enrolled 
as  pensioners,  90,  165,  171,  178, 
183,  190,  198,  219,  239,  241,  242,  247, 
283,  290,  296,  332,  399,  438  ;  act 
anent  pensioners,  367  ;  their  allow- 
ance diminished,  312,  399  ;  monthly 
pensions,  336  and  subsequent  annual 
accounts,  also  366,  386  ;  extra- 
ordinary pensions  stopped,  395  ; 
persons  receiving  aid  not  to  have  a 
vote  in  elections,  327  ;  special  pay- 
ments to  craftsmen  generally,  48,  80. 
166,  171,  176,  211,  218,  219,  223,  224, 
232,  239,  240,  241,  248,  254,  269,  275, 
291,  296,  306,  318,  319,  322,  328,  333, 
341,  350,  352,  356,  367,  368,  370,  371, 
372,  400,  403,  408,  425,  432,  439,  468, 
479,  489,  490,  493,  500,  509  ;  to  the 
poor  of  the  burgh.  217,  268.  269  ;  to 
persons  from  Ireland,  217,  230  ;  to 
craftsmen  robbed  in  Ireland,  218,  219 ; 
to  strangers,   80. 

,  of    the  crafts  :    armour    money    to 

be  applied  for  their  behoof,  298,  306, 
314  ;  each  craft  to  sustain  its  own, 
344,  367  ;  special  help  given  to  crafts, 
380. 

Potters,  332,  333. 

Powder,  purchase  of,  198. 

Properties  :  see  Auchingray,  Bridgegate, 
Caldercrooks,  Cross,  Drygatc,  Galloiv- 
gale,  Gorbals,  Newport,  Rottenrow, 
Saltmarket,  Stablcgreen,  Stockwellgaie. 
Trongate.  Sale  of  property,  327  ; 
purchase  of  land  adjoining  hospital, 
155,  399. 

Quarter  accounts  :  paid  by  the  crafts  for 
the  maintenance  of  the  hospital,  sec 
Hospital  new  rental ;  sums  increased, 
170,  171,  216,  332,  434,  508,  509,  511  ; 
gardeners'  contribution,  75  ;    time  of 


pajment,  75,  253,  377,  395  ;  pay- 
ment to  be  made  through  the 
deacons,  253 ;  to  be  made  before 
voting,  328  ;  collection  of,  19,  51,  62, 
69,  70,  79,  81,  86  ;  a  clothier  to  pay, 
343. 

Riding  to  parliament,  20,  41,  93  ;  expenses 

of,  20,  41,  61,  93. 
Rottenrow  properties,  annuals  from,  310. 

Sabbath  observance,  192. 

Saddlers,  a  pendicle  of  the  hammermen, 
338. 

Sailors,  entered  with  the  crafts,  352. 

Salt,  excise  of,  353. 

Saltmarket  properties,  annuals  from,  311. 

School  for  poor  children,  270  ;  expense 
of,  borne  by  the  crafts,  271  ;  master 
appointed,  277,  278  ;  house  for,  281 
salary  of,  290,  294,  290,  303,  309  ; 
discharge  of,  305 ;  visitation  of 
school,  300,  304,  307  ;  teacher  ap- 
pointed, 321. 

Sea  silver,  8. 

Seal  for  the  House,  45. 

Shoemakers,  a  pendicle  of  the  cordiners, 
339,  340. 

Skinners  :  contributions  to  the  building 
of  the  crafts  hospital,  6,  7  ;  to  its 
maintenance  (annually),  24,  172,  216; 
towards  expenses  of  riding  to  parlia- 
ment, 20,  41  ;  to  the  Kirk  Session  for 
the  town's  poor,  268  ;  to  the  minister 
of  the  burgh,  13,  18,  19,  27  ;  towards 
a  new  building  at  the  college,  92  ;  to 
the  maintenance  of  the  school  (an- 
nually), 271  ;  towards  sustaining  the 
town's  plea  against  Dumbarton,  35. 

:    complaint  against  a  hammerman 

infringing  their  liberties,  177  ;  cor- 
diners' complaint  against  the  skinners, 
339,  340  ;  craft's  compts  to  be  re- 
heard, 329  ;    poor  of  craft,  380. 

See  under  Apprentices,  Deacon 
Convener's  Council  Judgments,  and 
Gorbals. 

Slaters,  a  pendicle  of  the  masons,  402. 


INDEX. 


573 


Small  annuals,  see  under  Collector. 

Stablegreen  properties,  annuals  from,  310. 

Stenting  of  the  crafts,  see  Coiitribulioiis, 
and   Taxation. 

of  the  burgh,   excise  of    malt    for, 

403,  404,  419,  42.i,  448. 

Stockwellgate  properties,  annuals  from, 
312. 

Strangers  entering  as  freemen  :  byelaw  of 
the  hammermen  anent,  4G9  ;  of  the 
weavers,  473  ;  petition  by  masons 
and  Wrights  for  restraint  of,  343. 

Sword  money,  see  Armour  money. 

Tailors :  contributions  to  the  building  of 
the  crafts  hospital,  6,  8 ;  to  its 
maintenance  (annually),  24,  171,  216, 
511  ;  towards  expenses  of  riding  to 
parliament,  41  ;  to  the  Kirk  Session 
for  the  town's  poor,  268  ;  to  the 
minister  of  the  burgh,  13,  18,  19,  27; 
towards  a  new  building  at  the  college, 
92  :  to  the  maintenance  of  the  school 
(annually),  271  ;  towards  sustaining 
the  town's  plea  against  Dumbarton, 
34. 

:    complaint  by  hammermen  against 

tailors  infringing  their  craft  liberties, 
338  ;    deacon  has  a  key  of  the  con- 
vener's  box,  511  ;    deacon  unlawod, 
225,  226. 
See  Clothier. 

See  under  Apprentices.  Deacon 
Convener's  Coinicil  Judgments,  and 
Gorbals. 

Tanners,  a  pendicle  of  the  skinners,  332, 
339,  340. 

Taxation  of    the  crafts    to    sustain    the 
town's    litigation,    14,    15,    34  ;     to 
sustain    the   town's   debt,    210  ;     for 
the  king's  purposes,  291. 
See  Contributions. 

Tent  :  purchase  of,  for  common  use, 
198  ;    sent  East,  203. 

Tobacco,  license  to  sell,  248,  257,  260. 

Town  Council,  acts  of :  anent  admission 
of  burgesses,  33  ;  anent  ranking, 
musters,  etc.,  see  Appendix. 


.     minutes     of :      assigning     certain 

rentals  to  the  trafts  hospital,  55  ; 
anent  the  admission  of  a  notary 
as  a  freeman  hammerman,  140. 

:     craft     bye-laws     to     be     ratified 

by,  409  ;  craft  causes  remitted  to, 
387  ;  craft  petitions  to,  343,  351,  358, 
403,  472  ;  letters  of  deaconhead  to 
be  exhibited  to,  358  ;  leets  for  dea- 
con convener  rejected  by,  242,  357  ; 
directions  as  to  leets  given,  263  ; 
proposal  to  levy  an  excise  on  malt 
agreed  to  by  crafts,  403,  404  ;  pro- 
posal anent  excise  of  brandy  remitted 
back  by  the  House,  502. 
See  Magistrates. 

Town's  debt  :  convention  of  crafts  and 
merchants  anent,  7  ;  guildry  fines  to 
be  applied  for  relief,  27  ;  crafts  taxed 
to  sustain,  210  ;  money  raised  after 
Philiphaugh  repaid,  321. 
See   Taxation. 

liberties,    defence    of.     14,     15,    34, 

491,   492. 
See  Guildry. 

Trongate  properties,  annuals  from,  312. 

Ventures:  disposal  of  goods,  191  ;  daills, 
78,  129,  140,  158,  163,  182,  187,  211, 
233,  326,  313,  316,  380,  450,  452.  453, 
496,  513,  517;  iron,  390,  406,  408; 
salt,  209,  217,  224,  303,  352,  425,  429, 
435,  479,  480,  487,  489,  496  ;  tar, 
187,  195,  236  ;  wine,  386,  392,  393, 
396,  406,  415. 

Wapinschaws,  deacon  convener  to  wear 
insignia  of  his  office  at,  40. 

Washing  of  "heids,"  payments  for,  125. 

Weavers :  contributions  to  the  building 
of  the  crafts  hospital,  6,  8  ;  to  its 
maintenance  (annually),  24,  171,  216, 
508,  509  ;  towards  expenses  of  riding 
to  parliament,  20,  41  ;  to  the  Kirk 
Session  for  the  town's  poor,  268  ;  to 
the  minister  of  the  burgh,  18,  19,  27  ; 
towards  a  new  building  at  the  college, 
92  ;   to  the  maintenance  of  the  school 


574 


INDEX. 


(annually),  271  ;  towards  sustaining 
the  town's  plea  against  Dumbarton, 
34. 

:     craft    unlawed.    23,    41  ;      deacon 

unlawed.  62  ;  late  deacon  unlawed, 
323  ;  act  anent  election  of  deacon 
and  masters,  149  ;  deacon  to  have  a 
key  of  the  convener's  box,  508,  509  ; 
entry  money  for  strangers,  473  ; 
representation  on  deacon  convener's 
council  increased,  509;  craft  gets  the 
old  box  of  the  House,  511  ;  relations 
with  Gorbals  weavers,  298. 

See  under  Acts  of  the  House,  Ap- 
prentices, Byelaws,  Deacon  Convener's 
Council  Judgments,  and  Gorbals. 

of  Gorbals,  the  Glasgow  craft  peti- 
tion the  House  anent.  298. 

Wrights :  contributions  to  the  building 
of  the  crafts  hospital,  6,  10;  to  its 
maintenance  (annually),  24,  172,  216  ; 


towards  expenses  of  riding  to  parlia- 
ment, 20,  41  ;  to  the  Kirk  Session 
for  the  town's  poor,  268  ;  to  the 
minister  of  the  burgh,  14,  IS,  19,  27  ; 
towards  a  new  building  at  the  college, 
93  ;  to  the  maintenance  of  the  school 
(annually),  271  ;  towards  sustaining 
the  town's  plea  against  Dumbarton, 
35. 
-  :  craft's  box  examined,  401  : 
craftsmen  unlawed,  328  ;  craft's 
comptmaking,  50  ;  disputes  with  the 
masons.  9,  27  ;  master  of  craft 
ordained  to  be  received  by  the 
deacon,  49  ;  petition  with  the  masons 
for  restraint  of  strangers,  343  ;  join 
with  the  hammermen  in  a  complaint 
before  the  Town  Council,   351. 

Sec  under  Apprentices,  Deacon 
Convener's  Council  Judgments,  and 
Gorbals. 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


HD  Glasgow.     Trades  house 

64.62  The  records  of  the  T'^^des 

G6g6         house  of  Glasgow,  A.T).  1605- 
1678 


